reinforcement learning is terrible.
It just so happens that everything that
we had before is much worse. I'm
actually optimistic. I think this will
work. I think it's tractable. I'm only
sounding pessimistic because when I go
on my Twitter timeline, I see all this
stuff that makes no sense to me. A lot
of it is, I think, honestly just uh
fundraising. We're not actually building
animals. We're building ghosts. These
like sort of ethereal spirit entities
because they're fully digital and
they're kind of like mimicking humans.
And it's a different kind of
intelligence. It's business as usual
because we're in an intelligence
explosion already and have been for
decades. Everything is gradually being
automated. Has been for hundreds of
years. Don't write blog posts. Don't do
slides. Don't do any of that. Like build
the code, arrange it, get it to work.
It's the only way to go. Otherwise,
you're missing knowledge. If you have a
perfect AI tutor, maybe you can get
extremely far. The geniuses of today are
barely scratching the surface of what a
human mind can do. I think
>> today I'm speaking with Andre Karpathy.
Andre, why do you say that this will be
the decade of agents and not the year of
agents?
>> Mhm. Uh well first of all uh thank you
for uh having me here. I'm excited to be
here. So the quote that you've just
mentioned it's the decade of agents.
That's actually a reaction to an
existing pre-existing quote I should say
where I think a lot of some of the labs
I'm not actually sure who said this but
they were alluding to this being the
year of agents
>> uh with respect to LLMs and uh how they
were going to evolve. And I think um I
was triggered by that because I feel
like there's some overpredictions going
on in the industry and uh in my mind
this is really a lot more accurately
described as the decade of agents and we
have some very early agents that are
actually like extremely impressive and
that I use daily uh you know cloud and
codeex and so on but I still feel like
there's uh so much work to be done and
so I think my like my reaction is like
we'll be working with these things for
decade they're going to get better uh
and uh it's going to be wonderful but I
think I was just reacting to the
timelines I suppose of
of the uh implication
>> and what do you think will take a decade
to accomplish? What are the bottlenecks?
>> Well, um actually make it work. So in my
mind, I mean when you're talking about
an agent, I guess or what the labs have
in mind and what maybe I have in mind as
well is it's uh you should think of it
almost like an employee or like an
intern that you would hire to work with
you. Uh so for example, you work with
some employees here. Um when would you
prefer to have an agent like Cloud or
Codeex uh do that work? Like currently
of course they can't. What would it take
for them to be able to do that? Why
don't you do it today? And the reason
you don't do it today is because they
just don't work. So like they don't have
enough intelligence. They're not
multimodal enough. They can't do
computer use and all this kind of stuff.
And they don't do a lot of things.
You know, they don't have continual
learning. You can't just tell them
something and they'll remember it. And
they're just cognitively lacking. And
it's just not working. And I just think
that it will take about a decade to work
through all of those issues.
>> Interesting. So, um, as a professional
podcaster and a
a viewer of AI from afar, it's sort of
easy to identify for me like, oh, here's
what's lacking. Continual learning is
lacking or multimodality is lacking. But
I don't really have a good um way of
trying to put a timeline on it. Like if
somebody's like, how long will continual
learning take? I
>> there's no like prior I have about like
this is a project that should take 5
years, 10 years, 50 years.
>> Why a decade? Why not one year? Why not
50 years?
>> Um, yeah, I guess this is where you get
into like a bit of I guess my own
intuition a little bit and also just
kind of doing a bit of an extrapolation
of with respect to my own experience in
the field, right? So, I guess I've been
in AI for
>> almost two decades. I mean, it's going
to be maybe 15 years or so, not that
long. um you had Richard Sutton here who
was around of course for much longer but
I do have about 15 years of experience
of people making predictions of seeing
how they actually uh turned out and also
I was in the industry for a while and I
was in research and I've worked in the
industry for a while so I guess I kind
of have uh just a general intuition that
I have left from that uh and uh I feel
like the problems are uh tractable
they're surmountable
>> but uh they're still difficult and if I
just average it out that just kind of
feels like a ticket I guess to me
>> this is actually quite interesting I I
want to like hear not only the history
but what people in the room felt was
about to happen at various different
>> breakthrough moments like what were the
ways in which their feelings were either
overly pessimistic or overly optimistic?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Should we just go through each of
them one by one?
>> Oh yeah. I mean that's a giant question
because of course you're talking about
15 years of stuff that happened. I mean
AI is actually like so wonderful because
there have been a number of I would say
seismic shifts
>> that were like the entire field has sort
of like suddenly looked a different way,
right? And I guess I've maybe lived
through two or three of those.
>> And I still think there will continue to
be some because they come with some kind
of like almost surprising irregularity.
>> Well, my when my career began, of
course, like when I started to work on
deep learning, when I became interested
in deep learning, this was just kind of
like by chance of being right next to
Jeff Hinton at University of Toronto.
And Jeff Hinton, of course, is kind of
like the godfather figure of AI and he
was training all these neural networks
and I thought it was incredible and
interesting, but this was not like the
main thing that everyone in AI was doing
by far. Yeah,
>> this was a niche subject on the side.
That's kind of maybe like the first like
dramatic sort of seismic shift that came
with the Alexet and so on.
>> I would say like Alex sort of reoriented
everyone and everyone started to train
neural networks. Uh but it was still
like very like per task per specific
task. So maybe I have an image
classifier or I have a neural machine
translator or something like that. And
people became very slowly actually
interested in basically kind of agents I
would say. uh um and people started to
think okay well maybe we have a check
mark next to the visual cortex or
something like that but what about the
other parts of the brain and how can we
get an actual like full agent or an full
entity that can actually interact in the
world and I would say the Atari uh sort
of uh deep reinforcement learning shift
in 2013 or so uh was part of that early
effort of agents in my mind because it
was an attempt to try to get agents that
not just perceive the world but also
take actions and interact and get
rewards from environments and at the
time this was Atari games
>> right
>> and I kind of feel like that was a
misstep actually uh and it was a misstep
that actually even the early openi that
I was a part of of course uh kind of
adopted because at that time the
sitegeist was reinforcement learning
environments games playing beat games
get lots of different types of games and
open was doing a lot of that. So that
was maybe like another like prominent
part of I would say AI where maybe for
two or three or four years everyone was
doing reinforcement learning on games
>> and uh basically that was a little bit
of a misstep
>> and what I was trying to do at open a
actually is like I was always a little
bit suspicious of games as being like
this thing that would actually lead to
AGI because in my mind you want
something like an accountant or uh like
something that's actually interacting
with the real world and I just didn't
see how games kind of like add up to it
and so my project at OpenAI for example
was um within in the scope of the
universe project on an on an agent that
was using keyboard and mouse to operate
web pages. And I really wanted to have
something that like interacts with, you
know, the actual digital world that can
do knowledge work.
>> And it just so turns out that um this
was extremely early, way too early. so
early that we shouldn't have been
working on that, you know, uh because um
if you're just stumbling your way around
and keyboard mashing and mouse clicking
and trying to get rewards in these
environments, um your reward is too
sparse and you just won't learn and
you're going to burn a forest uh
computing and you're never actually
going to get something off the ground.
>> And so what you're missing is this uh
power of representation in the neural
network.
>> And so for example, today people are
training those computer using agents,
but they're doing it on top of a large
language model. And so you actually have
to get the language model first. you
have to get the representations first
and you have to do that by all the
pre-training and all the LLM stuff. So I
kind of feel like maybe loosely speaking
it was like people keep maybe trying to
get the full thing too early a few times
where people like really try to go after
agents too early I would say and that
was Atari and Universe
>> uh and even my own experience and you
actually have to do some things first
before you sort of get to those agents.
Um, and maybe now the agents are a lot
more competent, but maybe we're still
missing uh sort of some parts uh of that
stack. But I would say maybe those are
like the three like major buckets of
what people were doing. Uh, training
neural nets per tasks trying to the
first round of agents uh and then maybe
the LLMs and actually seeking the
representation power of the neural
networks before you uh tack on
everything else on top.
>> Interesting. Yeah, I guess if I were to
steal man, the sort of the sudden
perspective would be that humans
actually can just take on everything at
once, right? Even animals can take on
everything at once, right? Animals are
maybe a better example because they
don't even have the scaffold of
language. They just get thrown out into
the world and they just have to make
sense of everything without any labels.
Um,
>> and the vision for AGI then should just
be something which like just looks at
sensory data, looks at the computer
screen, and it just like figures out
what's going on from scratch. I mean, if
a human was put in a similar situation,
had to be trained from scratch, but I
mean, this is like a human growing up or
an animal growing up. So, why shouldn't
that be the vision for AI rather than
like this thing where we're doing
millions of years of training? I think
that's a really good question and I
think um I mean so so Sutton was on your
podcast and I saw the podcast and I had
a write up about that podcast almost
that gets into a little bit of how I see
things and I I kind of feel like I'm
very careful to make analogies to
animals because they came about by a
very different optimization process.
>> Animals are evolved and they actually
come with a huge amount of hardware
that's built in. Um, and when, for
example, my example in the post was the
zebra. A zebra gets born and a few
minutes later it's running around and
following its mother. That's an
extremely complicated thing to do.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, that's not reinforcement learning.
That's something that's baked in. And
evolution obviously has some way of
encoding the weights of our neural nets
in ATCGS. And I have no idea how that
works, but it apparently works. So, I
kind of feel like uh brains just were
came from a very different process. And
I I'm very hesitant to take inspiration
from it because we're not actually
running that process. So in my post, I
kind of said we're not actually building
animals. Uh we're building ghosts.
>> Yeah.
>> Or spirits or whatever people want to
call it. Uh because um we're not uh
we're not doing training by evolution.
Uh we're doing training by basically
imitation of humans and the data that
they've put on the internet. And so you
end up with these like sort of ethereal
spirit entities because they're fully
digital and they're kind of like
mimicking humans. And it's a different
kind of intelligence. Like if you
imagine a space of intelligences, we're
we're starting off at a different point
almost. We're not we're not really
building animals, but I think it's also
possible to make them a bit more
animallike over time. And I think we
should be doing that. And so I kind of
feel like so just I guess one more point
is I do feel like Sutton basically has a
very like his framework is like we want
to build animals and I actually think
that would be wonderful if we can get
that to work that would be amazing. If
there was a single like
>> algorithm that you can just you know run
on the internet and it learns everything
that would be incredible. I almost
suspect that I'm not actually sure that
it exists and that's certainly actually
not what animals do
>> because animals have this outer loop of
evolution,
>> right?
>> Um, and a lot of what looks like
learning is actually a lot more
maturation of the brain and I think that
actually very little reinforcement
learning for animals and I think a lot
of the reinforcement learning is
actually like more like motor tasks.
It's not intelligence tasks. So I
actually kind of think humans don't
actually like really use RL roughly
speaking is what I would say.
>> Can you read the last sentence? A lot of
that intelligence is not motor task.
It's what? Sorry. A lot of the
reinforcement learning in my perspective
would be things that are a lot more like
motor like like uh simple kind of like
task throwing a hoop or something like
that. Um but I don't think that humans
use reinforcement learning for a lot of
intelligence tasks like problem solving
and so on.
>> Interesting.
>> That doesn't mean we don't have we we
shouldn't do that for research but I
just feel like that's what animals do or
don't.
>> I'm going to take us a second to digest
that because there's a lot of different
ideas. Maybe one clarifying question I
can ask to um understand a perspective.
So I think you suggest that look
evolution is doing the kind of thing
that pre-training does in the sense of
building something which can then
understand the world. The difference I
guess is that evolution
has to be titrated in the case of humans
through 3 gigabytes of DNA. And so
that's very unlike the weights of a
model. I mean literally the weights of
the model are a brain which obviously is
not encoded in the the sperm and the egg
or does not exist in the sperm and the
egg. So it has to be grown and also the
information for every single synapse in
the brain simply cannot exist in the 3
gigabytes that exist in the DNA.
Evolution seems closer to finding the
algorithm
>> which then does the lifetime learning.
Now maybe the lifetime learning is not
analogous to RL to your point. Is that
compatible with the thing you were
saying or would you disagree with that?
>> I think so. I would agree with you that
there's some miraculous compression
going on because obviously the weights
of the neural net are not stored in
ATCGs.
>> There's some kind of a dramatic
compression and there's some kind of
like learning algorithms encoded that
that take over and do some of the
learning online.
>> So I definitely agree with you on that.
Basically I would say I'm a lot more
kind of like practically minded. I don't
come at it from the perspective of like
let's build animals. I come from it
perspective of like let's build useful
things. So I have a hard hat on and I'm
just observing that look we're not going
to do evolution because I don't know how
to do that. Uh but it does turn out we
can build these ghost spirit-l like
entities by imitating internet
documents. This works and it's actually
kind of like it's a way to bring you up
to something that has a lot of sort of
built-in knowledge and intelligence in
some way. Uh similar to maybe what
evolution has done. So that's why I kind
of call pre-training this kind of like
crappy evolution. It's like the
practically possible version with our
technology and what we have available to
us to get to a starting point where we
can actually do things like
reinforcement learning and so on. M just
to steelman the other perspective
because after doing this in an interview
and thinking about it a bit he has an
important point here evolution does not
give us the knowledge really right it
gives us the algorithm to find the
knowledge and that seems different from
pre-raining so if perhaps the
perspective is that pre-training helps
build the kind of entity which can learn
better it teaches metal learning and
therefore it is some similar to like
finding an algorithm um but if if it's
like evolution gives us knowledge and
pre-training gives us knowledge they're
not that analogy seems to break down
>> so it's subtle and I You're you're right
to push back on it, but basically the
thing that pre-training is doing, so
you're basically getting the next token
predictor on over the internet and
you're training that into a neural net.
>> It's doing two things actually that are
kind of like unrelated. Number one, it's
picking up all this knowledge as I call
it. Number two, it's actually becoming
intelligent.
>> Um, by observing the algorithmic
patterns in the internet, it actually
kind of like boots up all these like
little circuits and algorithms inside
the neural net to do things like in
context learning and all this kind of
stuff.
>> And actually, you don't actually need or
want the knowledge. I actually think
that's probably actually holding back
the neural networks overall because it's
actually like getting them to rely on
the knowledge a little too much
sometimes.
>> For example, I I kind of feel like
agents one thing they're not very good
at is going off the data manifold of
what exists on the internet.
>> If they had less knowledge or less
memory actually maybe they would be
better.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And so what I think we have
to do kind of going forward and this
will be part of the research paradigms
is I actually think we need to start um
we need to figure out ways to remove
some of the knowledge and to keep what I
call this cog is this cognitive core
>> is this like intelligent entity that is
kind of stripped from knowledge but
contains the algorithms and contains the
magic you know of intelligence and
problem solving and the strategies of it
and all this kind of stuff.
>> There's so much interesting stuff there.
Okay. So let's start with in context
learning. This is an obvious point, but
I think it's worth just like saying it
explicitly and meditating on it. The
situation in which these models seem the
most intelligent in which they are like
I talk to them and I'm like, "Wow,
there's really something on the other
end that's like responding to me
thinking about things. If it like makes
a mistake, it's like, oh wait, that's
actually the wrong way to think about
it. I'm backing up." All that is
happening in context. That's where I
feel like the real intelligence you can
like visibly see.
>> And that in context learning process is
developed by gradient descent on
pre-training, right? like it meta it
spontaneously metalarns in context
learning but the incontext learning
itself is not gradient descent in the
same way that our lifetime intelligence
as humans to be able to do things is
conditioned by evolution but our actual
learning during our lifetime is like
happening through some other process
>> I actually don't fully agree with that
but you should continue with
>> okay actually then I I'm very curious to
understand how that analogy breaks down
>> I think I'm hesitant to say that in
context learning is not doing gradient
descent uh because I mean it's not doing
explicit creating descent, but I I still
think that
>> so in context learning basically it's
it's pattern completion within uh a
token window, right? And it just turns
out that there's a huge amount of
patterns on the internet. And so you're
right, the model kind of like learns to
complete the pattern. Yeah.
>> And that's inside the weights. The
weights of the neural network are trying
to discover patterns and complete the
pattern. And there's some kind of an
adaptation that happens inside the
neural network, right?
>> Uh which is kind of magical and just
falls out from internet just because
there's a lot of patterns. I will say
that there have been some papers that I
thought were interesting that actually
look at the mechanisms behind in context
learning and I do think it's possible
that in context learning actually runs a
small gradient descent loop internally
in the layers of the neural network and
so I recall one paper in particular
where they were doing um uh linear
regression actually using in context
learning. So basically your inputs into
the neural network are XY pairs
>> XY XY XY that happen to be on the line
>> and then you do X and you expect the Y
and the neural network when you train it
in this way actually does do um does do
linear regression
>> and um normally when you would run
linear regression you have a small
gradient descent optimizer that
basically looks at XY looks at an error
calculates the gradient of the weights
and does the update a few times. It just
turns out that when they looked at the
weights of that in context learning
algorithm uh they actually found some
analogies to uh to gradient descent
mechanics. In fact, I think even the
paper went was stronger because they
actually hardcoded the weights of a
neural network to do gradient descent
through uh attention and all the all the
internals of of the neural network. So,
I guess that's just my only push back is
that who knows how in context learning
works, but I actually think that it's
probably doing a little bit of some kind
of funky gradient descent internally and
that I think that that's that's
possible. So, I guess I I was only
pushing back on you're saying it's not
doing in context learning. Who knows
what it's doing, but it's probably maybe
doing something similar to it, but we
don't know. So then it's worth thinking
about okay if both of them are
implementing gradient sorry if in
context learning and pre-training are
both implementing something like
gradient descent
>> why does it feel like in context
learning actually we're getting to this
like continual learning real
intelligence like thing whereas you
don't get the analogous feeling just
from pre-training at least you could
argue that and so if it's the same
algorithm what could be different well
one way you can think about it is how
much information does the model store
perform information it receives from
training. And if you look at
pre-training, if uh I think if you look
at llama 3 for example, I think it's
trained on
>> 15 trillion tokens and if you look at
the 70B model,
>> that would be the equivalent of 07 bits
per token in that it sees in
pre-training in terms of like the
information in the weights of the model
compared to the tokens it reads.
>> Whereas if you look at the KV cache
>> and how it grows per additional token in
in context learning, it's like 320
kilobytes.
>> Yeah. So that's a 35 millionfold
difference in how much information per
token is assimilated by the model. I
wonder if that's relevant at all.
>> I think I kind of agree. I mean the way
I usually put this is that anything that
happens during the training of the
neural network. The knowledge is only
kind of like a hazy recollection of what
happened in train in the training time
and that's because the compression is
dramatic. You've you're taking 15
trillion tokens and you're compressing
it to just your final network of a few
billion parameters. So obviously it's a
massive amount of compression going on.
uh so I kind of refer to it as like a
hazy recollection of the internet
documents whereas anything that happens
in the context window of the neural
network you're plugging all the tokens
and it's building up all this KV cache
representation is very directly
accessible to the neural net so I
compare the KV cache and the the stuff
that happens at test time to like more
like a working memory
>> uh like all the stuff that's in the in
um in the context window is very
directly accessible to the neural net so
there's always like these um almost
surprising analogies between LLMs and
humans and I find them kind of
surprising because we're not trying to
build a human brain of course u just
directly we're just finding that this
works and we're doing it
>> but I do think that
>> anything that's in the weights it's kind
of like a hazy recollection of what you
read a year ago anything that you give
it as a context uh at test time is
directly in the working memory um and I
think that's a very powerful analogy to
think through things so when you for
example go to an LLM and you ask it
about some book and what happened in it
like nan's book or something like that
the LM will often give you some stuff
which is roughly correct but if you give
it the full chapter and ask it questions
you're going to get much better results
because it's now loaded in the working
memory of the model. So I basically
agree with your very long way of saying
that I kind of agree and that's why
>> stepping back what is it the part about
human intelligence that we like have
most failed to replicate with these
models?
>> Um I almost feel like um just uh just a
lot of it still. So maybe one way to
think about it, I don't know if this is
the the best way, but I almost kind of
feel like again making these analogies,
imperfect as they are, um we've stumbled
by with the transformer neural network,
which extremely powerful, very general.
You can train transformers on audio or
video or text or whatever you want and
it just learns patterns and they're very
powerful and it works really well. That
to me almost indicates that this is kind
of like some piece of cortical tissue.
Uh it's something like that because the
cortex is famously very um plastic as
well. you can rewire um you know parts
of brains and there was the slightly
gruesome experiments with rewiring like
visual cortex to the auditory cortex and
this animal like learn find etc. Um, so
I think that this is kind of like
cortical tissue. I think when we're
doing reasoning and planning inside the
neural networks, so basically doing a
reasoning traces um for thinking models,
that's kind of like the prefrontal
cortex. Um, and then um I think we uh
maybe those are like little check marks,
but I still think there's many uh brain
parts and nuclei that are not explored.
So maybe for example there's a basic
ganglia doing a bit of reinforcement
learning when we fine tetune the models
on reinforcement learning but you you
know whereas like the hippocampus not
obvious what that would be some parts
are probably not important maybe the
cerebellum is like not important to
cognition it's thought so so we can skip
some of it uh but I still think there's
for example the amydala all the emotions
and instincts um and there's probably
like a bunch of other nuclei in the
brain that are very ancient that I don't
think we've like really replicated I
don't actually know that we should be
pursuing you know the building of an
analog of human brain I'm again an
engineer mostly at heart. But um I still
feel like maybe another way to answer
the question is you're not going to hire
this thing as an intern and it's missing
a lot of it's because it comes with a
lot of these cognitive deficits that we
all intuitively feel when we talk to the
models.
>> Um
>> and so it's just like not fully there
yet. You can look at it as like not all
the brain parts are checked off yet.
>> This is maybe relevant to the question
of thinking about how fast these issues
will be solved. So sometimes people will
say about continual learning. Look,
actually you could already you could
easily replicate this capability just as
in context learning emerged
spontaneously as a result of
pre-training.
Continual learning over longer horizons
will emerge spontaneously if the model
is incentivized to recollect information
over longer horizons or horizons longer
than one session. So if there's um some
like outer loop RL which has many
sessions within that outer loop then
like this continual learning where it
uses like it fine-tunes itself or it
writes to an external memory or
something will just sort of like emerge
spontaneously. Do you think
>> do you think things are that are
plausible? I just I don't have really a
prior over like how plausible is that?
How likely is that to happen?
>> I don't know that I fully resonate with
that because I feel like these models
when you boot them up and they have zero
tokens in the window, they're always
like restarting from scratch where they
were. So I don't actually know in that
worldview what it looks like. Uh because
um again making maybe making some
analogies to humans just because I think
it's roughly concrete and kind of
interesting to think through. I feel
like when I'm awake I'm building up a
context window of stuff that's happening
during the day but I feel like when I go
to sleep something magical happens where
uh I don't actually think that that
context window stays around. Um I think
there's some process of distillation
into weights of my brain.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and this happens during sleep and all
this kind of stuff. We don't have an
equivalent for of that in large language
models and that's to me more adjacent to
when you talk about continual learning
and so on as absent. These models don't
really have this distillation phase um
of taking what happened, analyzing it,
obsessively thinking through it, um
basically doing some kind of a synthetic
data generation process and distilling
it back back into the weights and maybe
having uh you know specific neural net
per person uh maybe it's a Laura it's
not a full uh yeah it's not a full
weight uh neural network that's it's
just small some of the small sparse
subset of the weights are changed
>> but basically we do want to create ways
of creating these individuals that have
very long contexts. It's not only
remaining in the context window because
the context windows grow very very long
like maybe we have some very elaborate
sparse attention over it
>> but I still think that humans obviously
have some process for distilling some of
that knowledge into the weights we're
missing it and I do also think that
humans um have some kind of a very
elaborate sparse attention scheme
>> um which I think we're starting to see
some early hints of uh so deepse v3.2 2
just came out and I saw that they have
like a sparse attention as an example
and this is one way to have very very
long context windows.
>> So I almost feel like we are redoing a
lot of the cognitive tricks that
evolution came up with through a very
different process but we're I think
going to converge on a similar
architecture cognitively.
>> Interesting. In 10 years do you think
it'll still be something like a
transformer but with a much more
modified attention and more sparse uh
MLPS and so forth? Well, the way I like
to think about it is okay, let's uh
translation invariance in time, right?
So 10 years ago, where were we?
>> 2015 uh we had uh convolutional neural
networks primarily. Residual networks
just came out. Um so remarkably similar
I guess, but quite a bit different
still. I mean transformer was not
around. Um
>> you know all the um all these sort of
like more modern uh tweaks on the
transformer were not around. So maybe
some of the things that we can bet on I
think in 10 years uh by translational
sort of equivariance is um we're still
training giant neural networks with uh
forward backward pass and update through
gradient descent um but maybe it looks a
little bit different
>> and it's just everything is much bigger
actually recently I also went back all
the way to 1989 which was kind of a fun
uh exercise for me a few years ago uh
because I was reproducing uh Yan Lakun's
1989 convolutional network which was the
first neural network I'm aware of
trained via gradient descent like modern
neural network trained gradient descent
on uh digit recognition
>> and I was just interested in okay how
can I modernize this how much of this is
algorithms how much of this is data how
much of this progress is uh compute and
systems and I was able to very quickly
like half the learning rate just knowing
by tra time travel by 33 years so if I
time travel by algorithms to 33 years I
could adjust what yan did in 1989 and I
could basically half the learning half
the error but to get further gains I had
to add a lot more data. I had to like
10x the training set and then I had to
actually add more computational
optimizations. Uh had to basically train
for much longer with dropout and other
regularization techniques.
>> And so it's almost like all these things
have to improve simultaneously. So um
you know we're probably going to have a
lot more data. We're probably going to
have a lot better hardware. Probably
going to have a lot better kernels and
software. We're probably going to have
better algorithms. And all of those it's
almost like no one of them is winning
too much. All of them are surprisingly
equal.
M
>> and this has kind of been the trend for
a while. So I guess to answer maybe your
question, I expect differences
algorithmically to what's happening
today. Uh but I do also expect that some
of the things that have stuck around for
a very long time will probably still be
there. It's probably still giant neural
network trained with gradient descent.
That would be my guess.
>> It's surprising that all of those things
together only haved um uh half the
error. Yeah. which is so like 30 years
of progress is uh maybe maybe half is a
lot because like if you half the error
that actually means that
>> half is a lot. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Um
>> but it's I guess what was shocking to me
is everything needs to improve across
the board.
>> Uh architecture optimizer loss function
and also has improved across the board
forever. So I kind of expect all those
changes to be alive and well. Well,
yeah. Actually, I was about to ask a
very similar question about nano chat
because since you just coded up
recently, every single sort of step in
the, you know, process of building a
chatbot is like fresh in your RAM.
>> And I'm curious if you had similar
thoughts about like, oh, there was no
one thing that was relevant to going
from GPT2 to nanohat. What are sort of
like surprising takeaways from the
experience
>> building? So, nanohat is a kind of a
repository I released was it yesterday
or day before? I can't remember.
We can see the sleeve deliberation that
went into the
>> um well it's just trying to be a it's
trying to be the simplest complete
repository that covers the whole
pipeline end to end of building a chacha
pt clone
>> and so you know you have all of the
steps not just any individual step which
is a bunch of I worked on all the
individual steps sort of in the past and
really small pieces of code that kind of
um show you how that's done in
algorithmic sense um uh in like simple
code but this kind of handles the entire
pipeline I I think in terms of learning
it's not it's not so much um I don't
know that I actually found something
that I learned from from it necessarily.
I kind of already had in my mind as like
how you build it and this is just a
process of mechanically uh building it
and making it clean enough and uh so
that people can actually learn from it
and um that uh they find it useful.
>> Yeah. What is the best way for somebody
to learn from it? Is it just like delete
all the code and try to reimplement from
scratch? Try to add modifications to it?
>> Uh yeah, I think that's a that's a great
question. I would probably say so
basically it's about 8,000 lines of code
that takes you through the entire
pipeline. I would probably put it on the
right monitor like if you have two
monitors you put it on the on the right.
>> Um and you want to build it from
scratch. You build it from start. You're
not allowed to copy paste. You're
allowed to reference. You're not allowed
to copy paste. Maybe that's how I would
do it.
>> Um but I also think the repository by
itself it is like a pretty large beast.
I mean it's you know it's a it's when
you write this code you don't go from
top to bottom. you go from chunks and
you grow the chunks and uh that
information is absent like you wouldn't
know where to start and so I think it's
not just the final repository that's
needed it's like the building of the
repository which is a complicated chunk
growing process
>> right
>> uh so that part is not there yet I would
love to actually like add that probably
later this week or something in some way
like either it's a uh it's probably a
video or something like that but um but
maybe roughly speaking that's what I
would try to do is build the stuff
yourself uh but uh don't allow yourself
copy paste
>> I do think that there's two types of
knowledge almost like there's the high
level surface knowledge but the thing is
that when you actually build something
from scratch you're forced to come to
terms with what you don't actually
understand and you don't know that you
don't understand it
>> interesting
>> and it always leads to a deeper
understanding uh and um it's like just
the only way to to build is like if I
can't build it I don't understand it is
that a fine code I believe or something
along those lines
>> I 100% I've always believed this very
strongly uh because there's all these
like micro things that are just not
properly arranged and you don't really
have the knowledge you just in had the
knowledge. So, don't write blog posts,
don't do slides, don't do any of that.
Like, build the code, arrange it, get it
to work. It's the only way to go.
Otherwise, you're missing knowledge.
>> Um, you tweeted out that coding models
were actually of very little help to you
in assembling this repository and I'm
curious why that was.
>> Yeah. Uh, so the repository, I guess I
built it over a period of a bit more
than a month, and I would say there's
like three major classes of how people
interact with code right now. Some
people completely reject all of LLMs and
they are just uh writing by scratch. I
think this is probably not the the right
thing to do anymore. Um the intermediate
part which is where I am is you still
write a lot of things from scratch but
you use uh the autocomplete uh that's
basically uh available now from these
models. So when you start writing out
little piece of it it will it would auto
complete for you and you can just tap
through and most of the time it's
correct. Sometimes it's not and you edit
it but you're still very much the um
sort of architect of what you're
writing. And then there's the, you know,
VIP coding, uh, you know, hi, please
implement this or that, uh, you know,
enter and then let the model do it. And
that's the agents.
>> Um, I do feel like the agents work in
very specific settings and I would use
them in specific settings. But again,
these are all tools available to you and
you have to like learn what they what
they're good at and what they're not
good at and when to use them.
>> So the agents are actually pretty good.
For example, if you're doing boilerplate
stuff,
>> boilerplate code that's like just cop,
you know, just copy paste stuff. They're
very good at that. they're very good at
stuff that occurs very often in the
internet
um because there's lots of examples of
it in the training sets of these models.
Um so so there's like features of things
that where the models will do very well.
I would say nanohat is not an example of
this because it's a fairly unique
repository. There's not that much code I
think in the way that I've structured it
and um and it's not boilerplate code.
It's like actually like intellectually
intense code almost and everything has
to be very precisely arranged and the
models are always trying to
>> they kept trying to I mean they have so
many cognitive deficits right so one
example they keep trying to they keep
misunderstanding the code um because
they they have too much memory from all
the typical ways of doing things on the
internet that I just wasn't adopting.
>> Uh so the models for example
>> I mean I don't know if I want to get
into the full details but they keep they
keep um they keep thinking I'm writing
normal code and I'm not. Maybe one
example maybe
>> one example is so the way to synchronize
so you have eight GPUs that are all
doing forward backwards the way to
synchronize gradients between them is to
use a distributed data parallel
container of PyTorch which automatically
does all the as you're doing the
backward it will start communicating and
synchronizing gradients I didn't use DDP
because I didn't want to use it because
it's not necessary so I threw it out
>> and I basically wrote my own
synchronization routine that's inside
the step of the optimizer and so the
models were trying to get me to use the
DDB container
>> and they very concerned about okay this
gets way too technical but I wasn't
using that container because I don't
need it and I have a custom
implementation of something like it
>> and they just couldn't internalize that
you had your own
>> yeah they couldn't they couldn't get
past that and then um they kept trying
to like mess up the style like they're
way too overdefensive they make all
these try catch statements they keep
trying to make a production codebase and
I have a bunch of assumptions in my code
and it's okay and uh and it's just like
I don't need all this extra stuff in
there and so I just kind of feel like
they're bloating the codebase. They're
bloating the complexity. They keep
misunderstanding. They're using
deprecated APIs a bunch of times. So,
it's total mess. Um, and uh, it's just
it's just not that useful. I can go in,
I can clean it up, but it's not that
useful. I also feel like it's kind of
annoying to have to like type out what I
want in English because it's just too
much typing. Like, if I just navigate to
the part of the code that I want and I
go where I where I know the code has to
appear and I start typing out the first
three letters, autocomplete gets it and
just gives you the code. And so I think
it's this is a very high information
bandwidth to specify what you want is if
you point to the code where you want it
and you type out the first few pieces
and the model will complete it.
>> So I guess what I mean is um I think
these models are good in certain parts
of the stack actually use the models a
little bit in um there are two examples
where I actually use the models that I
think are illustrative. Uh one was when
I generated the report that's actually
more boilerplatey. So I actually bcoded
part partially some of that stuff that
was fine um because it's not like
mission critical stuff and it works
fine.
>> And then the other part is when I was
rewriting the tokenizer uh in Rust uh
I'm actually not as good at Rust because
I'm fairly new to Rust. So I was doing
there's a bit of vibe coding going on uh
in when I was writing some of the Rust
code but I had Python implementation
that I fully understand and I'm just
making sure I'm making a more efficient
version of it and I have tests so I feel
safer doing that stuff. Um and so
basically they lower or like they
increase accessibility to uh languages
or paradigms that you might not as be
not be as familiar with. Uh so I think
they're very helpful there as well.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh because there's a ton of Rust code
out there. The models are actually
pretty good at it. I happen to not know
that much about it. So the models are
very useful there.
>> Um the reason I think this question is
so interesting is because the main story
people have about AI exploding and
getting to super intelligence pretty
rapidly. is AI automating, AI
engineering and AI research.
So they'll look at the fact that you can
have cloud code make entire applications
from scratch and be like if you had this
incapability inside of open AI and deep
mind and everything well just imagine
the level of like just you know a
thousand of you or a million of you in
parallel finding little architectural
tweaks and so it's quite interesting to
hear you say that this is the thing
they're sort of asymmetrically worse at
and it's like quite relevant to
forecasting whether the AI 2027 type
explosion
>> is likely to happen anytime soon. I
think that's a good way of putting it.
And I think you're getting at some of my
like why my timelines are a bit longer.
You're right. Um I think um yeah,
they're not very good at code that
hasn't never been written before maybe
is like one way to put it, which is like
what we're trying to achieve when we're
building these models.
>> Very naive question, but um the
architectural tweaks that you're adding
to uh Nanohat, they're in a paper
somewhere, right? They might even be in
a repo somewhere. So it's
um is it surprising that they aren't
able to integrate that into whenever
you're like add rope embeddings or
something they do that in the wrong way.
>> It's it's tough. I think they kind of
know they kind of know but they don't
fully know and they don't know how to
fully integrate it into the repo and
your style and your code and your place
and some of the custom things that
you're doing and
>> and uh how it fits with all the
assumptions of the repository and all
this kind of stuff. So I think they do
have some knowledge but um they haven't
gotten to the place where they can
actually integrate it, make sense of it
uh and so on. I do think that a lot of
the stuff by the way continues to
improve. So um I think currently
probably state-of-the-art model that I
go to is the GP5 Pro.
>> Um and uh that's a very very powerful
model. So if I actually have 20 minutes
I will copy paste my entire repo and I
go to GPT5 Pro the Oracle for like some
questions and often it's not too bad and
surprisingly good compared to what
existed a year ago.
>> Yeah. Um, but I do think that uh overall
the models are are um they're not there.
And I kind of feel like the industry
it's it's um it's over it's it's making
too big of a jump and it's trying to
pretend like this is amazing and it's
not. It's slop and I think they're not
coming to terms with it and maybe
they're trying to fund raise or
something like that. I'm not sure what's
going on but it's we're at this
intermediate stage. The models are
amazing. They still need a lot of work
for now. autocomplete is my sweet spot
>> but sometimes for some types of code I
will go to a nom agent.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Actually this this is also here's
another reason why this is really
interesting. Um through the history of
programming there's been many
productivity improvements compilers
linting better programming languages etc
which have increased programmer
productivity but have not led to an
explosion. So that's like one that
sounds very much like autocomplete tab
and this other category is just like
automation of the programmer
>> and it's interesting you're seeing more
in the category of the historical
analogies of like you know better
compilers or something
>> maybe because this one other kind of
thought that is like
>> I do feel like I have a hard time
differentiating where AI begins and
stops because I do see AI as
fundamentally an extension of computing
in some in some pretty fundamental way
and I I feel like I see a continuum of
this kind of like recursive
self-improvement or like of speeding up
uh programmers all the way from the
beginning like even like I would say
like uh code editors
>> um uh syntax highlighting
>> uh syntax uh or like checking even of
the of the types like data type checking
>> um
>> all these kinds of tools that we've
built for each for each other even
search engines like why aren't search
engines part of AI like
>> I don't know like ranking is kind of AI
right at some point Google was like even
early on they were thinking of
themselves as an AI company doing Google
search engine which I think is totally
fair
>> and So, I kind of see it as a lot more
of a continuum than I think other people
do and I don't it's hard for me to draw
the line and I kind of feel like okay,
we're now getting a much better
autocomplete and now we're also getting
some agents which are kind of like these
loopy things but they kind of go off
rails sometimes. Um, and what's going on
is that the human is progressively doing
a bit less and less of the low-level
stuff. For example, we're not writing
the assembly code because we have
compilers,
>> right? Like compilers will take my high
level language and C and write the
assembly code. So we're abstracting
ourselves very very slowly and there's
this what I call autonomy slider of like
more and more stuff is automated of the
stuff that can be automated at any point
in time and we're doing a bit less and
less and uh raising ourselves in the
layer abstraction over the automation.
One of the big problems with RL is that
it's incredibly information sparse.
Lelbox can help you with this by
increasing the amount of information
that your agent gets to learn from with
every single episode. For example, one
of their customers wanted to train a
coding agent. So, Labelbox augmented an
IDE with a bunch of extra data
collection tools and staffed a team of
expert software engineers from their
aligner network to generate trajectories
that were optimized for training. Now,
obviously, these engineers evaluated
these interactions on a past field
basis, but they also rated every single
response on a bunch of different
dimensions like readability and
performance. And they wrote down their
thought processes for every single
rating that they gave. So you're
basically showing every single step an
engineer takes and every single thought
that they have while they're doing their
job. And this is just something you
could never get from usage data alone.
And so Labelbox packaged up all these
evaluations and included all the Asian
trajectories and the corrective human
edits for the customer to train on. This
is just one example. So go check out how
Labelbox can get you highquality
frontier data across domains,
modalities, and training paradigms.
reach out at labelbox.com.
Let's talk about RL a bit. Uh you two
did some very interesting things about
this. Um conceptually, how should we
think about the way that humans are able
to build a rich world model just from
interacting with our environment and in
ways that seems almost irrespective of
the final reward at the end of the
episode.
>> Mhm. If somebody has, you know,
somebody's starting to start a business
and at the end of 10 years, she finds
out whether the business succeeded or
failed,
>> we say that she's earned a bunch of
wisdom and experience,
>> but it's not because like the log probs
of every single thing that happened over
the last 10 years are updated or
downweighted. It's something much more
deliberate and uh rich is happening.
What is the ML analogy and how does that
compare to what we're doing with other
ones right now?
>> Yeah, maybe the way I would put it is
humans don't use reinforcement learning
is maybe what I've as I've said it. I I
think they do something different which
is yeah you experience so reinforcement
learning is a lot worse than I think the
average person thinks
reinforcement learning is terrible.
It just so happens that uh everything
that we had before is much worse
u because previously we're just
imitating people so it has all these
issues. Um so in reinforcement learning
say you're working with uh you're
solving a math problem because it's very
simple. You're given a math problem and
you're trying to find the solution. Um
now in reinforcement learning you will
try lots of things in parallel first. So
uh you're given a problem you try
hundreds of different attempts and these
attempts can be complex right they can
be like oh let me try this let me try
that this didn't work that didn't work
etc. And then maybe you get an answer
and now you check the back of the book
and you see okay the correct answer is
this and then you can see that okay this
one this one and that one got the
correct answer but these other 97 of
them didn't. So literally what
reinforcement learning does is it goes
to the ones that worked really well and
every single thing you did along the way
every single token gets upweighted of
like do more of this. The problem with
that is I mean people will say that u
your estimator has high variance but
what I mean it's just noisy it's noisy.
So basically it kind of almost assumes
that every single little piece of the
solution that you made that ride the
right answer was correct thing to do
which is not true. Like you may have
gone down the wrong alleys until you
arrive the right solution. Every single
one of those incorrect things you did,
as long as you got to the correct
solution, will be upweed as do more of
this. It's terrible.
>> Yeah, it's noise. You've done all this
work only to find a single at the end,
you get a single number of like, oh, you
did correct. And and based on that, you
weigh that entire trajectory as like
upweight or down weight. And so you're
the way I like to put it is you're
sucking supervision through a straw. Uh
because you've done all this work that
could be a minute of rollout and you're
you're like sucking the bits of
supervision of the final reward signal
through a straw and you're like putting
it You're like
basically like um yeah, you're
broadcasting that across the entire
trajectory and using that to upway or
down with that trajectory. It's crazy. A
human would never do this. Number one, a
human would never do hundreds of
rollouts. Uh number two, when a person
sort of finds a solution, they will have
a pretty complicated process of review
of like, okay, I think these parts that
I did well, these parts I did not do
that well, I should probably do this or
that. And they think through things.
There's nothing in current LLM that does
this. There's no equivalent of it. Um
but I do see papers popping out that are
trying to do this because it's obvious
to everyone in the field.
>> Yeah.
>> So I kind of see as like the first
imitation learning actually by the way
was extremely surprising and miraculous
and amazing that we can uh fine-tune by
imitation on humans. Um and that was
incredible because in the beginning all
we had was base models. Base models are
autocomplete. uh and it wasn't obvious
to me at the time uh and I had to learn
this and the paper that like blew my
mind was instruct GPT because it pointed
out that hey you can take the
pre-trained model which is autocomplete
and if you just fine-tune it on text
that looks like conversations the model
will very rapidly adapt to become very
conversational and it keeps all the
knowledge from pre-training and this
blew my mind because I didn't understand
that it's just like stylistically can
adjust so quickly and become an
assistant to a user through through just
a few loops of fine-tuning on that kind
of data It was very miraculous to me
that that that worked. So incredible.
And that was like two years, three years
of work. And now came RL. And RL allows
you to do a bit better than just
imitation learning, right? Because you
you can't have these re um reward
functions and you can hill climb on the
reward functions. And so some problems
have just correct answers. You can hill
climb on that without getting expert
trajectories to imitate. So that's
amazing. And the model can also discover
solutions that the human might never
come up with.
>> Uh so this is incredible. And yet it's
still stupid. Um, so I think we need we
need more and so I saw a paper from
Google yesterday that tried to have this
reflect and review p um uh idea uh in
mind. Uh what was the memory bank paper
or something? I don't know. I've
actually seen a few papers along these
lines. So I expect there to be some kind
of a major update to how we do
algorithms for LLMs coming in that realm
and then I think we need three or four
or five more
um something like that. But you you're
so good at coming up with the evocative
evocative phrases sucking supervision
through a straw. It's like so good. Um
why hasn't So you're saying like your
problem with outcome based reward is
that you have this huge trajectory and
then at the end you're you're trying to
learn every single possible thing about
what you should do and what you should
learn about the world from that one
final bit. um why hasn't given the fact
that this is obvious, why hasn't process
based supervision
>> as an alternative been a successful way
to make models more capable? What what
has been preventing us from using this
alternative paradigm?
>> So process based supervision just refers
to the fact that we're not going to have
a reward function only at the very end
of after you've made 10 minutes of work.
I'm not going to tell you you did well
or not well.
>> I'm going to tell you at every single
step of the way how well you're doing.
>> Um and this is basically the reason we
don't have that is it's not trick it's
tricky how you do that properly.
>> Um because you have partial solutions
and you don't know how to assign credit.
So when you get the right answer, it's
just uh an equality match to the answer.
Very simple to implement.
>> If you're doing basically process
supervision, how do you assign an
automatable way partial credit
assignment? It's not obvious how you do
it. Lots of labs, I think, are trying to
do it with these LLM judges. So
basically, you get LLMs to try to do it.
So you prompt an LLM, hey, look at a
partial solution of a student. How well
do you think they're doing if the answer
is this? And they try to tune the
prompt. Um, the reason that I think this
is kind of tricky is quite subtle. And
it's the fact that anytime you use an
LLM to assign a reward, those LLMs are
giant things with billions of parameters
and they're gameable.
>> And if you're reinforcement learning
with respect to them, you will find
adversarial examples for your LM judges
>> almost guaranteed.
>> You can't do this for too long. You do
maybe 10 steps or 20 steps, maybe it
will work. But you can't do a hundred or
a thousand because it's not obvious
because um I know I understand it's not
obvious but basically the model will
find little cracks.
It will find all these like spurious
things in the nooks and crannies of the
giant model and find a way to cheat it.
So one example uh that's prominently in
my mind is I think this I think this was
probably public but basically if you're
using an LM judge for a reward so you
just give it a solution from a student
and ask it if the student will or not.
We were training with reinforcement
learning against that reward function
>> and it worked really well and then um
suddenly the reward became extremely
large like it was massive jump and it
did perfect and you're looking at it
like
>> wow this this means the student is
perfect in all these problems it's fully
solved math
>> but actually what's happening is that
when you look at the completions that
you're getting from the model they are
complete nonsense they start out okay
and then they change to duh duh duh duh
so it's just like oh okay let's take two
plus three and we do this and this and
then duh duh duh duh duh
>> and you're looking at it's like this
crazy. How is it getting a reward of one
or 100%. Um, and you look at the LLM
judge and it turns out the is an
adversarial example for the model and it
assigns 100% probability to it. And it's
just because this is an out of sample
example to the LLM. It's never seen it
during training and you're in pure
generalization land,
>> right?
>> It's never seen it during training. And
in the pure generalization land, you can
find these examples that that uh break
it.
>> You're basically training the LLM to be
a prompt injection model. Not even that
prompting injection is way too fancy.
You're you're finding adversarial
examples as they're called. These are
nonsensical uh solutions um that are
obviously wrong, but the model things
are amazing.
>> So to the extent you think this is the
bottleneck to making RL more functional,
then that will require making LLMs
better judges if you want to do this in
an automated way. And then so is it just
going to be like some sort of GAN-like
approach where you had to train models
to be more robust? Yeah. To
>> I think the labs are probably doing all
that like okay so the obvious thing is
like the should not get 100% reward.
Okay well take the put in the training
set of the LM judge and say this is not
100% this is 0%. You can do this
>> but every time you do this you get a new
LLM and it still has adversarial
examples. There's infinity adversarial
examples. And I think probably if you
iterate this a few times, it'll probably
be harder and harder to find real
examples, but I'm not 100% sure because
this thing has a trillion parameters or
whatnot. Um, so I bet you the the labs
are trying. Uh, I don't actually I I
still think I still think we need other
ideas.
>> Interesting. Do do you have some shape
of what the other idea
>> could be? So like this this idea of like
review um review solution encompass
synthetic examples such that when you
train on them you get uh you get better
and like metal learn it in some way and
I think there's some papers that I'm
starting to see pop out. I only am at a
stage of like reading abstracts because
a lot of these papers, you know, they're
just ideas. Someone has to actually like
make it work on a frontier LLM lab scale
uh in full generality because when you
see these papers, they pop up and it's
just like a little bit of noisy, you
know, it's cool ideas, but I haven't
actually seen anyone convincingly uh
show that this is possible. That said,
the LLM labs are fairly closed. Uh so,
who knows what they're doing now, but
>> yeah. So I guess I can I I see a very um
not easy but like I I can conceptualize
how you would be able to train on
synthetic examples or synthetic problems
that you have made for yourself. But
there seems to be another thing humans
do. Maybe sleep is this, maybe
daydreaming is this
>> which is not necessarily come up with
fake problems but just like reflect.
>> Yeah.
>> And I'm not sure what the ML analogy
for, you know, daydreaming or sleeping
but just like just reflecting. I haven't
come up with any problem. Yeah, I mean
obviously the very basic analogy would
just be like fine-tuning on reflection
bits, but I feel like in practice that
probably wouldn't work that well. So I
don't know if you have some take on what
the analogy of like this thing is.
>> Yeah, I do think that that we're missing
some aspects there. So as an example,
>> uh when you're reading a book, um
>> I almost feel like currently when LLMs
are reading a book, what that means is
we stretch out the sequence of text and
the model is predicting the next token
and it's getting some knowledge from
that. That's not really what humans do,
right? So when you're reading a book, I
almost don't even feel like the book is
like exposition I'm supposed to be
attending to and training on. The book
is a is a set of prompts for me to do
synthetic data generation
>> or for you to get to a book club and
talk about it with your friends. And
it's by manipulating that information
that you actually gain that knowledge.
And I I think we have no equivalent of
that again with LLMs. They don't really
do that. But I'd love to see during
pre-training some kind of a stage that
uh thinks through the material and tries
to reconcile it with what it already
knows and thinks through for like some
amount of time. and um gets that to
work. And so there's no equivalence of
any of this. This is all research.
There's some subtle very subtle that I
think are very hard to understand
reasons why it's not trivial. So if I
can just describe one,
>> why can we just synthetically generate
and train on it?
>> Well, because every synthetic example
like if I just give synthetic generation
of the model thinking about a book, you
look at it and you're like, "This looks
great. Why can't I train on it?" Well,
you could try, but the model will
actually get much worse if you continue
trying. And that's because all of the
samples you get from models are silently
collapsed. They're silently, this is not
obvious if you look at any individual
example of it. They occupy a very tiny
manifold of the possible space of um
sort of thoughts about content. So the
LLMs when they come off, they're what we
call collapsed. They have a collapsed
data distribution. If you sample, one
easy way to see it is go to Chachi PT
and ask it tell me a joke. It only has
like three jokes.
>> It's not giving you the whole breath of
possible jokes.
>> It's giving you like it knows like three
jokes. Yeah,
>> they're silently collapsed. So
basically, you're not getting the
richness and the diversity and the
entropy uh from these models as you
would get from humans. So humans are a
lot more sort of noisier, but at least
they're not biased. They're not um in in
a statistical sense, they're not
silently collapsed. They maintain a huge
amount of entropy. So how do you get
synthetic data generation to work
despite the collapse and while
maintaining the entropy is a research
problem. Um, just to make sure I
understood, the reason that the collapse
is relevant to synthetic data generation
is because you want to be able to come
up with synthetic problems or
reflections which are not already in
your data distribution.
>> I guess what I'm saying is um, say we
have a chapter of a book and I ask a nom
to think about it.
>> Um, it will give you something that
looks very reasonable. But if I ask it
10 times, you'll notice that all of them
are the same. You can't just leave
scaling scaling quote unquote reflection
on the same amount of uh you know prompt
information and then get returns from
that. Okay.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So any individual sample
will look okay but the distribution of
it is is quite terrible and it's quite
terrible in such a way that if you
continue training on too much of your
own stuff you actually collapse. I
actually think that um there's no like
fundamental solutions to this possibly
and I also think humans collapse over
time. Uh I think this is uh again these
analogies are surprisingly good but
humans collapse during the course of
their lives. This is why children have
completely u you know they haven't
overfit yet and they will say stuff that
will shock you because it's kind of you
can see where they're coming from but
it's just not the thing people say
>> and because they're not yet collapsed
but we're collapsed. We end up
revisiting the same thoughts. we end up,
you know, saying more and more of the
same stuff and the learning rates go
down and uh the collapse continues to
get worse and then um everything
deteriorates.
>> Have Have you seen a super interesting
paper that dreaming is a way of
preventing this kind of overfitting and
collapse that the reason dreaming is uh
evolutionary adaptive is to
>> put you in weird situations that are
like very unlike your day-to-day reality
so that to prevent this kind of
>> overfitting. It's an interesting idea. I
mean, I do think that when you're
generating things in your head and then
you're attending to it, you're kind of
like training on your own samples.
You're training on your synthetic data
and if you do it for too long, you go
off rails um and you collapse way too
much. So, you always have to like seek
um entropy in your life.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh so talking to other people is a great
source of entropy
>> and uh things like that. So maybe the
brain has also built some internal
mechanisms uh for increasing the amount
of entropy um in in that process. But
yeah, maybe that's an interesting idea.
This is a very ill-formed thought. So I
I'll just put it out and let you react
to it. The best learners that we are
aware of, which are children, are
extremely
bad at recollecting information. In
fact, at the very earliest stages of
childhood, you will forget everything.
You're just an amnesiac about everything
that happens before a certain uh year
date, but you're like extremely good at
picking up new languages and learning
from the world. And maybe there's some
element of like being able to see the
forest for the trees. Whereas if you
compare it to the ex opposite end of the
spectrum, you have LLM pre-training
which these models will literally able
to regurgitate word for word what is the
next thing in a Wikipedia page, but
their ability to learn abstract concepts
really quickly the way a child can is
much more limited. And then adults are
somewhere in between where they don't
have the flexibility of childhood
learning, but they can, you know, adults
can memorize facts and information in a
way that is harder for kids. And I don't
know if there's something interesting
about that. I think there's something
very interesting about that. Yeah, 100%.
I do think that humans actually
>> um they do kind of like have a lot more
of an element compared to like seeing
the forest for the trees
>> and and we're not actually that good at
memorization which is actually a
feature.
>> Um because we're not that good at
memorization, we actually are kind of
like forced to uh find the patterns uh
um like more in a more general sense. I
think lens for in comparison are
extremely good at memorization. they
will recite passages from all these uh
training sources. Uh you can give them
completely nonsensical data like you can
take um you can hash some amount of text
or something like that. You get
completely random sequence. If you train
on it even just I think a single
iteration or two it can suddenly
regurgitate the entire thing. It will
memorize it. There's no way a person can
read a single sequence of random numbers
and recite it to you. Um, and that's a
feature, not a bug almost. Uh, because
it forces you to like only learn the
generalizable components, whereas LLMs
are distracted by all the memory that
they have of the pre-trained documents
and it's probably very distracting to
them, uh, in a certain sense. So that's
why when I talk about the cognitive
core, I actually want to remove the
memory, which is what we talked about.
I'd love to have it them have less
memory so that they have to look things
up uh and that they only maintain the
algorithms for like thought uh and the
idea of an experiment and all this
cognitive glue of um of acting
>> and this is also relevant to preventing
model collapse.
>> Um let me think um
I'm not sure I think it's almost like a
separate axis. M
>> it's almost like the the models are way
too good at uh memorization and somehow
we should we should remove that and I
think people people are much worse but
it's a good thing.
>> What is a solution to model collapse? I
mean you could so there's very naive
things you could attempt is just like
>> um the distribution over lo should be
wider or something like there's many
naive things you could try. What ends up
being the problem with the naive
approaches?
>> Um yeah I think that's a great question.
I mean you can imagine having a
regularization for entropy and things
like that. I guess they just don't work
as well empirically because uh right now
like the models are collapsed but I will
say um most of the tasks that we want of
them don't actually demand the diversity
>> is probably the the answer of what's
going on and so it's just that the model
the frontier labs are trying to make the
models useful and I kind of just feel
like the diversity of the outputs is not
so much number one it's much harder to
work with and evaluate and all this kind
of stuff but maybe it's not what's
actually capturing most of the value.
Um,
>> in fact, it's actively penalized, right?
If you if you're like super creative in
RL, it's like not good.
>> Yeah. Or like maybe if you're doing a
lot of writing help from LMS and stuff
like that, I think it's probably bad
because the models will give you these
like silently
>> all the same stuff, you know? So,
they're not um they won't explore lots
of different ways of answering a
question, right?
>> But I kind of feel like maybe this
diversity is just not as big of um yeah,
maybe like yeah, not as many
applications need it, so the models
don't have it, but then it's actually a
problem at synthetic generation time,
etc. So we're actually shooting
ourselves in the foot by not allowing
this entropy to maintain in the model.
And I think possibly uh the labs should
try harder.
>> And then I think you hinted that it's a
it's a very fundamental problem. It
won't be easy to solve. And yeah, what's
your intuition for that?
>> I don't actually know if it's um super
fundamental. Uh I don't actually know if
I intended to to say that. I do think
that um
I haven't done these experiments, but I
do think that you could probably
regularize the entropy to be uh to be
higher. So you're encouraging the model
to give you more and more solutions. Um
but you don't want it to start deviating
too much from the training data. It's
going to start making up its own
language. It's going to start using
words that are extremely rare. U you
know so it's going to drift too much
from the distribution. Uh so I think
controlling the distribution is just
like a tricky it's just like someone
just has to
>> it's probably not trivial in that sense.
>> How many bits should the optimal core
>> of intelligence end up being if you just
had to make a guess? the thing we put on
the uh van
>> pros how big does it have to be?
>> So it's really interesting in the
history of the field because at one
point everything was very um scaling
pill in terms of like oh we're going to
make much bigger models trillions of
parameter models and actually what the
models have done in size is they've gone
up and now they've actually kind of like
actually even come down their models are
smaller
>> and even then I actually think they
memorized way too much. Um, so I think I
had a prediction a while back that I I
almost feel like we can get cognitive
cores that are very good at even like a
billion billion parameters. It it should
be already like like if you talk to a
billion parameter model I think in 20
years you can actually have a very
productive conversation. It thinks um
and it's a lot more like a human. But if
you ask it some factual question might
have to look it up but it knows that it
doesn't know and it might have to look
it up and it will just do all the
reasonable things. That that's actually
surprising that you think it will take a
billion because already we have a
billion parameter models or a couple
billion parameter models that are like
very intelligent.
>> Well, some of our models are like a
trillion parameters, right? But they
remember so much stuff like just
>> Yeah. But I'm surprised that in 10 years
given the pace, okay, we have GPT OSS
20B that's way better than GPD4 original
which was a trillion plus uh parameters.
So given that trend, I'm actually
surprised you think in 10 years the
cognitive core is still a billion
parameters. I would I'm surprised you're
not like it's going to be like uh tens
of millions or millions.
>> No, because I basically think that the
training data is so here's the issue.
The training data is the internet which
is really terrible.
>> So there's a huge amount of gains to be
made because the internet is terrible.
Like if you actually and even the
internet when you and I think of the
internet, you're thinking of like a Wall
Street Journal or
>> that's not what this is. When you're
actually looking at a preaching data set
in the Frontier Lab and you look at a
random internet document, it's total
garbage. Like I don't even know how this
works at all. It's some like stock
ticker symbols. Uh
>> it's a huge amount of slop and garbage
from like all the corners of the
internet. It's not like your Wall Street
Journal article that's extremely rare.
>> Um so I almost feel like because the
internet is so terrible, we actually
have to sort of like build really big
models to compress all that. Uh most of
that compression is memory work instead
of like cognitive work. But what we
really want is the cognitive part
actually delete the memory
>> and then so I guess what I'm saying is
like we need intelligent models to help
us refine even the pre-training set to
just narrow it down to the cognitive
components and then I think you get away
with a much smaller model because it's a
much better data set and you could train
it on it but probably it's not trained
directly on it. It's probably distilled
for a much better model still but
>> but why is the distilled version still a
billion is I guess the thing I'm curious
about.
>> I just feel like distillation work
extremely well. So um almost every small
model if you have a small model it's
almost certainly distilled. Why would
you train on
>> right? No no but why is a distillation
not in 10 years not getting below 1
billion.
>> Oh you think it should be smaller than a
million?
>> I mean come on right I don't know at
some point uh it should take at least a
billion knobs uh to do something
interesting. You're thinking it should
be even smaller.
>> Yeah. I mean just like if you look at
the trend over the last few years just
finding low hanging fruit and going from
like trillion plus models that are like
literally two orders of magnitude
smaller in a matter of two years and
having better performance.
>> Yeah.
>> It makes me think the the sort of like
core of intelligence might be
>> even way way smaller like plenty of room
at the bottom to to paraphrase fineman.
>> I mean I almost feel like I'm already
contrarian by talking about a billion
parameter cognitive core and you're
outdoing me. I think um yeah maybe we
could get a little bit smaller. I mean,
I still think that there should be
enough.
>> Yeah, maybe it can be smaller.
>> I do think that practically speaking,
you want the model to have some
knowledge. You don't want it to be
looking up everything.
>> Um because then you can't like think in
your head. You're looking up way too
much stuff all the time. So, I do think
it needs to be some basic curriculum
needs to be there for knowledge.
>> Uh but it doesn't have esoteric
knowledge, you know.
>> Yeah. So, we're discussing what like
plausibly could be the cognitive core.
There's a separate question which is
what will actually be the size of French
models over time? And I'm curious to
have a prediction. So we had increasing
scale up to maybe 4.5 and now we're
seeing decreasing/plateing scale.
There's many reasons that could be going
on but do you have a prediction about
going forward will scale will the
biggest models be bigger? Will they be
smaller? Will they be the same?
>> Um yeah I don't know that I have a super
strong prediction. I do think that the
labs are just being practical. They have
a flops budget and a cost budget. And it
just turns out that pre-shraining is not
where you want to put most of your flops
or your cost. So that's why the models
have gotten smaller because they are a
bit smaller. or the pre-training stages
smaller etc but they make it up in
reinforcement learning and all this kind
of stuff mid training and all this kind
of stuff that follows
>> uh so they're just being practical in
terms of all the stages and how you get
the most bang for the buck um so I guess
like forecasting that trend I think uh
is quite hard I do still expect that
there's so much longing for it that's my
basic that's my basic expectation um and
so I I have a very wide distribution
here um do you expect the longing for it
to be similar in kind to the kinds of
things that have been happening over the
two to five years like just in terms of
like if I look at nano chat versus nano
GPT and then the architectural tweaks
you made
>> is that basically like the flavor of
things you continue to keep happening or
is there you're not expecting any giant
>> part yeah I I expect the data sets to
get much much better because when you
look at the average data sets they're
extremely terrible like so bad that I
don't even know how anything works to be
honest like look at the average example
in the training set
>> like factual mistakes errors yeah
>> nonsensical things um somehow when you
do it at scale the the noise washes away
and you're left with some of the signal.
Um so data sets will improve a ton. It's
just everything gets better. So um our
hardware um all the kernels um uh all
the kernels for running the hardware and
maximizing what you get with the
hardware, you know. So NVIDIA is slowly
tuning the actual hardware itself tensor
course and so on. All that needs to
happen and will continue to happen. Uh
all the kernels will get better and
utilize the chip to the max extent. all
the algorithms will probably improve
improve over optimization architecture
and um just all the modeling components
of how everything is done and what the
algorithms are that we're even training
with. So I do I do kind of expect like a
just very just everything nothing
dominates everything plus 20%.
>> Right. Interesting.
>> This is like roughly what I've seen.
>> Okay. This is my general manager Max.
>> Good to be here here every day.
>> And you have been here since you were
onboarded about 6 months ago. But when I
was
>> months ago
>> Oh, right. Um, time passes so fast. But
when I on boarded you, I was in France
and so we basically didn't get the
chance to talk at all almost
>> and you basically just gave me one
login.
>> I gave you access to my Mercury
platform, which is the banking platform
that I was using at the time to run the
podcast.
>> And so I logged into Mercury assuming
that that would just be the first of
many steps, but I realized that was how
you were running the entire business,
even down to a lot of our editors are
international contractors. And so you
had just figured out how to set up these
recurring payments to set up basic
payroll.
>> I mean, Mercury made the experience of
all of these things I was doing before
so seamless that it didn't even occur to
me until you pointed it out that this is
not the natural way to set up payroll or
invoicing or any of these other things.
>> I I was surprised, but I was like, it's
worked so far, so maybe I'll trust it.
And then now I can't think of doing
anything else.
>> All right, you heard him. Visit
mercury.com to apply online in minutes.
Cool. Thanks, Max.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> Dude, you're great at this. I'm so
nervous, but thank you.
>> Mercury is a financial technology
company, not a bank. Banking services
provided through Choice Financial Group,
column NA, and Evolve Bank and Trust
members FDIC. People have proposed
different ways of charting how much
progress we've made towards full AGI
because if you can come up with some
line, then you can see where that line
intersects with AGI and where that would
happen on the X-axis. And so people have
proposed, oh, it's like the education
level, like we had a high schooler and
then then they went to college with RL
and they're going to get a PhD. I don't
like that one.
>> Um or and then they'll propose horizon
length. So maybe they can do tasks that
take a minute. Uh they can do those
autonomously, then they can autonomously
do tasks that take an hour, a human an
hour, a human a week, etc.
>> How do you think about what is the
relevant um y-axis here? What is the how
should we think about how AI is making
progress?
>> So I guess I have two answers to that.
Number one, I'm almost tempted to like
reject the question entirely because
again like I see this as an extension of
computing. Have we talked about like how
to chart progress in computing or how do
you chart progress in computing since
1970s or whatever. What is the x-axis?
So I kind of feel like the whole
question is kind of like funny from that
perspective a little bit. Um but I will
say I guess like when people talk about
AI and the original AGI and how we spoke
about it when we um when OpenAI started
>> AGI was a system you can go to that can
do any task that is economically
valuable any economically valuable task
at um human performance or better.
>> Okay. So that was the definition and I
was pretty happy with that at the time
and I kind of feel like I've stuck to
that definition forever and then people
have made up all kinds of other
definitions but I I like I feel like I
like that definition. Now, number one,
the first concession that people make
all the time is they just take out all
the physical stuff because we're just
talking about digital knowledge work. I
feel like that's a pretty major
concession compared to the original
definition which was like any task a
human can do. I can lift things, etc.
Like AI can't do that obviously. So,
okay, but we'll take it.
>> Uh, what fraction of the economy are we
taking away by saying, "Oh, only
knowledge work." Um, I don't actually
know the numbers. I feel like um it's
about 10 to 20% if I had to guess. Is um
is only knowledge work. uh like someone
could work from home and perform tasks
something like that. Um I still think
it's a really large market. Uh like um
yeah what is the size of the economy and
what is 10 20% like we're still talking
about few trillion dollars of even in
the US of market share almost or like
work.
>> Um so still a very massive bucket. So
but I guess like going back to the
definition I guess what I would be
looking for is uh to what extent is that
definition true? Uh so um are there jobs
or lots of tasks? If we think of tasks
as you know not jobs but tasks kind of
difficult because the problem is like
society will refactor based on the tasks
that make up jobs compared to what's
yeah based on what's automatable or not
but today what jobs are replaceable by
AI so a good example recently was um
Jeff Hinton's prediction that
radiologists would not be a job anymore
and this turned out to be very wrong in
a bunch of ways right so radiologists
are alive and well and growing even
though computer vision is really really
good at recognizing all the different
things that they have to recognize in
and it's just messy complicated job with
a lot of surfaces and dealing with
patients and all this kind of stuff in
the context of it. Um so I guess I don't
actually know that by that definition AI
has made a huge amount of dent yet. Um
but some of the some of the jobs maybe
that I would be looking for have some
features that I think make it very
amenable to automation earlier than
later. As an example, call center
employees often come up and I think
rightly so. Uh because call center
employees have a number of simplifying
uh properties with respect to what's
automatable today. um their jobs are
pretty simple. It's a sequence of tasks
and every task looks similar like you
take a phone call with a person, it's 10
minutes of interaction or whatever it
is, probably a bit longer in my
experience, a lot longer. Um and you
complete some task in some scheme and
you change some database entries around
or something like that. So you keep
repeating something over and over again
and that's your job. So basically you do
want to bring in the task horizon how
long it takes to perform a task.
>> And then you want to also remove context
like you're not dealing with different
parts of services of companies or other
customers. It's just the database you
and a person you're serving. And so it's
more closed. It's more understandable
and it's purely digital. So I I would be
looking for those things. But even there
I'm not actually looking at full
automation yet. I'm looking for an
autonomy slider and I almost expect that
we are not going to instantly replace
people. We're going to be swapping in
AIs that do 80% of the volume. They
delegate 20% of the volume to humans and
humans are supervising teams of five AIs
doing the call center work that's more
rote. Um so I would be looking for new
interfaces or new um companies that
provide some kind of a layer that allows
you to manage some of these AIs that are
not yet perfect.
>> Yeah.
>> And then I would expect that across the
economy and a lot of jobs are a lot
harder than call center employee. I
wonder with radiologists,
I'm totally speculating. I have no idea
how what the actual workflow of a
radiologist involves,
>> but one analogy that might be applicable
is um when we were first being ruled
out, there would be a person sitting in
the front seat
>> and you just had to have them there to
make sure that if something went really
wrong, they're there to monitor. And I
think even today, people are still
watching to make sure things are going
well. Um Robo Taxi, who was just
deployed, actually still has a person
inside it. And we we could be in a
similar situation where if you automate
99% of a job, that last 1% the human has
to do is incredibly valuable because
it's bottlenecking everything else. And
if it end had if it was the case with
like with radiologists where the person
sitting in the front of the Uber or the
front of the Whimo has to be specially
trained for years in order to be able to
provide the last 1%. Their wages should
go go up tremendously because they're
like the one the one thing bottlenecking
wide deployment. So radiologists I think
their wages have gone up for similar
reasons. if you're like the last
bottleneck, you should you're like and
you're not funible, which like you know
a way driver might be fungeable with
other things. Um so you might see this
thing where like your wages go like
>> and until you get to 90% and then like
just like that
>> and when the last 1% is gone.
>> I see.
>> Um and I wonder if we're similar things
with radiology or salaries of call
center workers or anything like that.
>> Yeah, I think that's that's an
interesting um question. I don't think
we're currently seeing that with
radiology or uh and I don't have like um
in my understanding but I think
radiology is not a good example
basically. I don't know why Jeff Hinton
picked on radiology uh because I think
it's an extremely messy messy
complicated profession.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh so I would be a lot more interested
in what's happening with call center
employees today for example uh because I
would expect a lot of the road stuff to
be uh automatable today
>> and I don't have a first level access to
it but maybe I would be looking for
trends of what's happening with the call
center employees. Maybe some of the
things I would also expect is maybe they
are uh swapping in AI but then I would
still wait for a year or two because I
would potentially expect them to pull
pull back and actually rehire some of
the people.
>> I think there's been evidence that
that's already been happening in the
generally like companies that have been
adopting AI which I think is quite
surprising and I also find what was
really surprising.
>> Okay. Um AGI right like a thing which
should do everything and okay we'll take
out physical work. So think we should be
able to do all knowledge work. And what
you would have naively anticipated that
the way this regression would happen is
like you take a little task that a
consultant is doing, you take that out
of the bucket. You take a little task
that um an accountant is doing, you take
that out of the bucket. Uh and then
you're just doing this across all
knowledge work. But instead, if we do
believe we're on the path of hi with the
current paradigm, the progression is
very much not like that. at least um
>> it just does not seem like consultants
and accountants or whatever are getting
like huge productive improvement. It's
very much like
>> programmers are like getting more and
more chills of the way of their work. If
you to look at the revenues of these
companies discounting just like normal
chat revenue which I think is like I
don't know that's similar to like Google
or something just looking at API
revenues it's like dominated by coding
right so this thing which is general
quote unquote should be able to do any
knowledge work is just overwhelmingly
doing only coding and it's a surprising
way that you would expect like the AGI
to be deployed
>> so I think there's there's an
interesting point here because I do
believe coding is like the perfect first
thing for uh for a for uh these LLMs and
uh agents and that's because coding has
always fundamentally uh worked around
text.
>> It's computer terminals and text and
everything is based around text and LLMs
the way they're trained on the internet
love text
>> and so they're perfect text processors
and there's all this data out there and
it's just perfect fit. Um and also we
have a lot of infrastructure pre-built
for handling uh code and text. So for
example, we have a Visual Studio Code or
you know um your favorite um uh IDE
showing you code um and an agent can
plug into that. So for example, if an
agent has a diff where it made some
change, we suddenly have all this code
already that shows all the differences
to a codebase uh using a diff. So we've
it's almost like we've pre-built a lot
of the a lot of the infrastructure for
code. Now contrast that with some of the
things that that don't enjoy that at
all. So as an example like um there's
people trying to build automation not
for coding but for example for slides
like I saw a company doing slides that's
much much harder and the reason it's
much much harder is because slides are
not text.
>> Yeah.
>> Slides are little graphics and they're
arranged spatially and uh there's visual
component to it and um and slides uh
don't have this pre-built
infrastructure. Like for example if an
agent is to make a different uh change
to your slides. How does a thing show
you the diff? How do you see the diff?
There's no there's no nothing that shows
diffs for slides. Mhm.
>> So someone has to build it. Um so it's
just some of these things are not
amendable to AIS as they are which is
text processors and code surprisingly
is.
>> I I actually I'm not sure if that alone
explains it because
I personally have tried to get LLM to be
useful in domains which are just pure
language in language out. Um like
rewriting transcripts, like coming up
with clips based on transcripts, etc.
And you might say, well, I didn't, it's
very plausible that like I didn't do
every single possible thing I could do
to I put a bunch of, you know, good
examples in context, but maybe I should
have done like some kind of fine tuning,
whatever. So, our mutual friend Andy
Matushak told me that he actually tried
50 billion things to try to get models
to be good at writing space repetition
prompts. Again,
>> very much language in, language out
task. The kind of thing that should be
dead center in the repertoire of these
LLM. And he tried in context learning
obviously with a few short examples. He
tried I think he told me like a bunch of
things like supervised fine-tuning and
like you know retrieval whatever and he
just could not get them to make cards to
a satisfaction. So I find it striking
that even in language out domains
>> it's actually very hard to get a lot of
economic value out of these models
>> separate from coding. And I don't know
what what explains it.
>> Yeah I think um I think that makes
sense. I mean I would say um yeah it's
I'm not saying that anything text is
trivial right u I do think that code is
like it's pretty structured um text is
maybe a lot more flowery and this and
there's a lot more like
>> uh like entropy in text I would say I
don't know how else to put it um
>> and also I mean code is hard and so
people sort of feel quite empowered by
LLMs even from like simple simple kind
of uh knowledge I basically I don't
actually know that I have um a very good
I mean obviously like text makes it much
much easier maybe is maybe why I put it
but it doesn't mean that all text is
trivial.
>> Mhm. How do you think about super
intelligence? Do you expect it to feel
qualitatively different from normal
humans or human companies?
>> I guess I think I see it as like a
progression of automation in society
right and again like extraling the trend
of computing. I just feel like there
will be a gradual automation of a lot of
things and super intelligence will be
sort of like the extrapolation of that.
Uh so I do think we expect more and more
autonomous entities over time that are
doing a lot of the digital work and then
eventually even the physical work uh
probably some amount of time later but
basically I see it as just uh automation
>> um roughly speaking
>> I guess automation includes the things
humans can already do and super
intelligence things humans
>> well but some of the things that people
do is invent new things which I would
just put into the automation if that
makes sense. Yeah. But you I I guess
maybe um less abstractly and more sort
of like qualitatively.
>> Do you expect something to feel like
okay this because this thing can either
think so fast or has so many copies or
the copies can merge back in themselves
or is quote unquote much smarter. any
number of advantages an AI might have.
It will qualitative the civilization in
which these AI exists will just feel
qualitatively different from
humanization.
>> I think it will I mean it is
fundamentally automation but I mean it
will be like extremely foreign. I do I
do think it will look really strange
because um like you mentioned we can run
all of this on a computer cluster etc
and much faster and all this thing.
Yeah, I mean maybe some of the scenarios
for example that uh I start to get like
nervous about with respect with respect
to when the world looks like that is
this kind of like gradual loss of
control and understanding of what's
happening and I think that's actually
the most likely outcome probably is that
there will be a gradual loss of
understanding of
>> and we'll gradually layer all this stuff
everywhere and there will be fewer and
fewer people who understand it and that
there will be a sort of this like
scenario of a gradual loss of control
and understanding of what's happening
that to me seems most likely outcome of
how all this stuff will go down. Let me
probe on that a bit. It's not clear to
me that loss of control and loss of
understanding are the same things.
>> A board of directors at like whatever
TSMC, Intel, name a random company.
>> Um they're just like prestigious
80year-olds. They have very little
understanding and maybe they don't
practically actually have control, but
>> or actually maybe a better example is
the president of the United States.
>> President has a lot of [__] power. Um
I'm not trying to make a good statement
about the current operant, but maybe I
am. But like the actual level of
understanding is very different from the
level of control.
>> Yeah, I think that's fair. That's a good
push back. I think like um I guess I
expect loss of uh both.
>> Yeah.
>> How come? I mean loss of understanding
is obvious, but why loss of control? So,
so we're really far into territory of I
don't know what this looks like, but if
I was to write sci-fi novels, they would
look along the lines of not even a
single like entity or something like
that. So, that just sort of like takes
over everything. Uh, but actually like
multiple competing entities that
gradually become more and more
autonomous and uh some of them go rogue
and the others like fight them off and
all this kind of stuff. And it's like
this this hot pot of
>> completely autonomous activity that
we've uh delegated to. I I kind of feel
like
it would have that flavor.
>> It is not the fact that they are smarter
than us that is resulting in the loss of
control. It's the fact that they are
competing with each other and whatever
um arises out of that competition that
leads to the loss of control.
>> Um
I mean I basically expect there to be I
mean um a lot of these things I mean
they will be tools to people and the
people could some of the population is
like they're acting on behalf of people
or something like that. Maybe those
people are in control, but maybe it's a
loss of control overall for society in
in the sense that of like outcomes we
want or something like that. Um where
you have entities acting on behalf of
individuals that are still kind of uh
roughly seen as out of control.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> This is a question I should have asked
earlier. So we were talking about how
currently it feels like when you're
doing AI engineering or AI research,
these models are more like in the
category of compiler rather than uh in
the category of a replacement.
>> Yeah. At some point, if you have
quoteunquote AGI, it should be able to
do what you do.
>> And do you feel like having a million
copies of you in parallel results in
some huge speed up of AI progress?
Basically, if that does happen, would
you see do you expect to see an
intelligence explosion or even once we
have not talking about LLMs today, but
really
>> I guess like what I mean is um I do, but
it's business as usual because we're
we're in an intelligence explosion
already and have been for decades. And
when you look at GDP, it's basically the
GDP curve that is an exponential
weighted sum over so many aspects of the
industry. Everything is gradually being
automated has been for hundreds of
years. Um, industrial revolution is
automation and some of the physical
components and the tool building and all
this kind of stuff. Compilers, our early
software automation, etc. Uh, so I kind
of feel like we've been recursively
self-improving and uh exploding for for
a long time. Maybe another way to see it
is um I mean Earth was a pretty I mean
if you don't look at the biio mechanics
and so on it was a pretty boring place I
think and looked very similar if you
just look from space and earth is
spinning and then like we're in the
middle of this like firecracker event
>> right
>> but we're seeing it in slow motion but
>> I definitely feel like this is this has
already happened for a very long time
and I again like I I don't see AI as
like a distinct technology with respect
to what has already been happening for a
long time. Is there you think it's
continuous with this hyper exponential
trend?
>> And that's why like this is this was
very interesting to me because I was I
was trying to find AI in the GDP for a
while. I thought that GDP should go up
but then I looked at some of the other
technologies that I thought were were
very transformative like uh maybe
computers or mobile phones or etc. You
can't find them in GDP. GDP is the same
exponential and it's just that even for
example the early iPhone uh didn't have
the app store and it didn't have a lot
of the bells and whistles that the
modern iPhone has. And so even though we
think of 2008 was it when iPhone came
out as like some major seismic change,
it's actually not. Everything is like so
spread out and so slowly diffuses that
everything ends up being averaged up
into the same exponential. And it's the
exact same thing with computers. You
can't find them in a GDP is like, oh, we
have computers now.
>> That's not what happened because it's
such a slow progression. And with AI,
we're going to see the exact same thing.
It's just more automation. It allows us
to write different kinds of programs
that we couldn't write before. But AI is
still fundamentally a program and um
it's a new kind of computer and a new
kind of um kind of computing system, but
it has all these problems. It's going to
diffuse over over time and it's still
going to add up to the same exponential
and we're still going to have an
exponential that's going to get
extremely vertical and it's going to be
very foreign to live in that kind of an
environment. Are you saying that like
what will happen is so if you go if you
look at the trend before the industrial
revolution to currently you have a hyper
exponential where you go from like 0%
growth to then 10,000 years ago 0.02%
growth and then currently we're at 2%
growth. So that's a hyper exponential
and you're saying if you're charting AI
on there then it's like AI takes you to
20% growth or 200% growth
>> or you could be saying if you look at
the last 300 years what you've been
seeing is you have technology after
technology computers electrification
steam steam engines railways etc
>> but the rate of growth is the exact same
it's 2%. So are you saying the rate of
growth will
>> directly I expect this the rate of
growth has also stayed roughly constant
right
>> for only the last 200 300 years but over
the course of human history it's like
exploded right it's like gone from like
0% basically to like faster faster
faster industrial explosion 2%
>> like basically I guess what I'm saying
is for a while I tried to find AI or
look for AI in like the GDP curve and
I've kind of convinced myself that this
is false and that even when people talk
about recursive self-improvement and
labs and stuff like that I even don't
this is business as usual of course it's
going to recursively self-improved and
it's been recursively self-improving
like LLMs allow the engineers to work
much more efficiently to build the next
round of LLM and a lot more of the
components are being automated and and
tuned and etc. So all the engineers
having access to Google search is is
sort of part of it. All the engineers
having an ID all all of them having
autocomplete or having cloth code etc.
It's all just part of the same speed up
of the whole thing. So um it's just so
smooth.
>> But just just to clarify you're saying
that the rate of growth will not change
like um you know the intelligence
explosion will show up as like we it
just enabled us to continue staying on
the 2% growth trajectory just as the
internet helped us stay on the 2% growth
trajectory.
>> Yeah. My expectation is that it stays
the same pattern.
>> Yeah. I mean, um, ju just to throw the
opposite argument against you, my
expectation is that it like, um, blows
up because I think true AGI, and I'm not
talking about LLM coding bots, I'm
talking about like actual this is like a
replacement of a human in a server
>> is qualitatively different from these
other productivity improving
technologies
>> because it's labor itself, right? I
think we live in a very labor
constrained world. Like if you talk to
any startup founder, any person, you can
just be like, okay, what do you need
more of? You just like need really
talented people. And if you just have
billions of extra people who are
inventing stuff, integrating themselves,
making companies, bottoms, start to
finish, that feels qualitatively
different from just like a single
technology. It's sort of like just
asking if you like if you get 10 billion
extra people on the planet.
>> I mean, maybe a counterpoint. I mean,
number one, I I'm actually pretty um
pretty willing to be convinced one way
or another on this point. But I will
say, for example, computing is labor.
Computing was labor. Computers like a
lot of jobs disappeared because
computers are automating a bunch of
digital uh information processing that
you now don't need a human for. And so
computers are labor. Um and that has
played out. Um and you know,
self-driving as an example is also like
computers doing labor. Uh so like I
guess that's already been playing out.
So it's still business as usual. Yeah, I
guess you have a machine which just
spitting out more things like that
>> at potentially faster pace. And so we
historically we have examples of the
growth regime changing where like you
went from you know 2% growth to 2%
growth.
>> So it seems very plausible to me that
like
>> a machine which is then spitting out the
next self-driving car and the next
internet and whatever.
>> I mean I kind of yeah I see where it's
coming from. At the same time, I do feel
like people make this assumption of
like, okay, we have
>> uh God in a box and now it can do
everything and it's just it just won't
look like that. It's going to be it's
going to be able to do some of the
things. It's going to fail at some other
things. It's going to be gradually put
into society and basically we'll end up
with the same pattern is my prediction
because because this assumption of
suddenly having a completely intelligent
uh fully flexible, fully general human
uh in a box and we can dispensed it
arbitrary problems in society. I I I
don't think that we will have this like
discreet change and um and so I I think
we'll arrive at the same at the same
kind of a gradual diffusion of this
across the industry. M I I I think what
often ends up being misleading in these
um conversations is people I don't like
to use the word intelligence in this
context because intelligence implies you
think like oh super int super super
intelligence will be sitting there will
be a single super intelligence sitting
in a server and it'll like divine how to
come up with new technologies and
inventions that causes this explosion
>> and that's not what I'm imagining when
I'm imagining 20% growth
>> I'm imagining that there's billions of
you know basically like very smart human
minds potentially or that's all that's
required. But the fact that there's
hundreds of millions of them, billions
of them, each individually making new
products, figuring out how to integrate
themselves into the economy, just the
way if like a highly experienced smart
immigrant came to the country, you
wouldn't need to like figure out how we
integrate them in the economy. They
figured out they could start a company,
they could like uh make inventions, you
know, or like just increase productivity
in the world. And we have examples even
in the current regime of places that
have had 10 20% economic growth. you
know, if you just have a lot of people
and less capital in comparison to the
people, you can have Hong Kong or
Shenzhen or whatever just had decades of
10% plus growth. It and I think it's
just like there's a lot of really smart
people who are ready to like make use of
the resources and do this like period of
catchup because we've had this
discontinuity. And I think yeah, it
might be similar. So, I think um I I
think I understand, but I still think
that you're presupposing some discrete
jump. There's some unlock that we're
waiting to claim
>> and suddenly we're going to have
geniuses in data centers. And I I still
think you're presupposing some discrete
jump that I think has basically no
historical precedent that I can't find
in any of the statistics and that I
think probably won't happen.
>> I mean, the industrial revolution is
such a jump, right? You went from like
0% grow or 0.2% growth to 2% growth. Um
I'm just saying like you'll see another
jump like that.
>> I I I'm a little bit suspicious. I would
have to look at it. I I'm a little bit
suspicious and I would have to take a
look. For example, like maybe the some
of the logs are are not very good from
before the industrial revolution or
something like that. Uh so I'm a little
bit suspicious of it, but um yeah, maybe
you're right. I don't I don't have
strong opinions.
>> Maybe you're saying that this was a
singular event that was extremely
magical and you're saying that maybe
there's going to be another event that's
going to be just like that, extremely
magical. It will break paradigm and so
on.
>> I actually don't think they I mean the
crucial thing about the industrial
revolution was that it was not magical,
right? Like if you just zoomed in
>> what you would see in 1770 or 1870,
>> it's not that there like was some key
invention.
>> Yeah, exactly. But at the same time, you
did move the economy to a regime where
the progress was much faster
>> and the exponential 10xed
>> and I expected similar thing from AI
where it's not like
>> there's going to be a single moment
where we made the crucial
>> overhang that's being unlocked like
maybe there's a new energy source
there's there's some unlock in this case
some kind of a cognitive capacity and
there's an overhang of cognitive
cognitive work to do. That's right.
>> And you're expecting that overhang to be
filled by this new technology when it
crosses the threshold.
>> Yeah. And I mean I maybe one way to
think about it is through history a lot
of growth I mean growth comes because
people come up with ideas and then
people are like out there doing stuff to
execute those ideas and make valuable
output
>> and through most of this time population
isn't exploding that has been driving
growth for the last 50 years people have
argued that growth has stagnated
population and frontier countries has
also stagnated I think we go back on the
hyperexonential growth in population and
output
>> right sorry exponential growth in
population that causes hyperextential
growth and output.
>> Yeah. I mean, um, yeah, it's really hard
to tell.
>> I understand that viewpoint. I don't
intuitively feel that viewpoint.
>> So, we just got access to Google's VO
3.1, and it's been really cool to play
around with. The first thing we did was
run a bunch of prompts through both V3
and 3.1 to see what's changed in the new
version. So, here's V3.
>> Hi, I'm Max and I got stuck in a local
minimum again.
>> It's okay, Max. We've all been there.
Took me three epox to get out.
>> And here is VO3.1.
>> Hi, I'm Max and I got stuck in a local
minimum again.
>> It's okay, Max. We've all been there.
Took me three epox.
>> 3.1's output is just consistently more
coherent and the audio is noticeably
higher quality. We've been using VO for
a while now. Actually, we released an
essay earlier this year about AI firms
fully animated by V2, and it's been
amazing to see how fast these models are
improving. This update makes VO even
more useful in terms of animating our
ideas and our explainers. You can try VO
right now in the Gemini app with Pro and
Ultra subscriptions. You can also access
it through the Gemini API or through
Google Flow. You recommended Nick Lane's
book to me and then on that basis I I
also find it super interesting and I
interviewed him. Um and so I actually
have some questions about sort of
thinking about intelligence and
evolutionary history. Now that you over
the last 20 years of doing AI research,
you maybe have a more tangible sense of
what intelligence is, what it takes to
develop it. Are you more or less
surprised as a result that evolution
just sort of spontaneously
stumbled upon it?
>> Um, I love Nick's books by the way. So,
um, yeah, I was just listening to to his
podcast on the way up here. With respect
to intelligence and its evolution, I do
claim it came fairly
>> I mean it's very very recent, right? Um
I am surprised that it evolved. Yeah, I
I find it fascinating to think about all
the worlds out there. Like say there's a
thousand planets like Earth and what
they look like. I think Nane was here
talking about some of the early parts,
right? Like
>> okay, he expects basically very similar
life forms roughly speaking and bacteria
like things and most of them.
>> Yeah.
>> And then there's a few breaks in there.
I would expect that um the evolution of
intelligence intuitively feels to me
like it should be fairly rare event and
there have been animals for I guess
maybe you should base it on how long
some something has existed. So for
example, if bacteria have been around
for 2 billion years and nothing happened
then going to your carrier is probably
pretty hard cuz um cuz bacteria actually
um came up quite early in Earth's
evolution or history.
>> Um
>> and so I guess um how long have we had
animals? Maybe a couple hundred million
years like multisellular animals that
like run crawl etc.
um which is maybe 10% of um Earth's
lifespan or something like that. So I
maybe on that time scale is actually not
not too tricky. I still feel like
it's still surprising to me I think
intuitively that it developed. I would
maybe expect just a lot of like
animallike life forms doing animallike
things. Uh the fact that you can get
something that creates culture and
knowledge Yeah. and accumulates it is is
it is surprising to me that okay so
there's so there's actually a couple of
interesting follow-ups.
if you buy this uh sun perspective that
actually the crux of intelligence is
animal intelligence. What the quote said
is if you got to the squirrel you'd be
most of the way to AGI. Um
>> then we got to squirrel intelligence I
guess right after the Cambrian explosion
600 million years ago.
>> It seems like what instigated that was
the oxygenation event 600 million years
ago. But immediately the sort of like
intelligence algorithm was there to like
make the the squirrel intelligence,
right? So it's suggestive that animal
intelligence was like that as soon as
you had the oxygen in the environment
you had the curat you could just like
get the algorithm. Um I maybe there was
like sort of an accident that evolution
smell abundant so fast but I don't know
if that suggest is like actually quite
uh at the end going to be quite simple.
>> Yes basically it's so hard to tell right
with any of this stuff. I guess you can
base it a little bit on how long
something has exited or how long it
feels like something has been
bottlenecked. So very good describing
this like very apparent bottleneck in
bacteria for years like extreme
diversity of chemical biochemistry and
yet nothing that grows to become
>> animals two billion years um I I don't
know that we've seen exactly that kind
of an equivalent with animals and
intelligence uh to your point right but
I guess maybe we could also look at it
with respect to how many times we think
evol intelligence has like individually
sprung up
>> that's a really good that's a really
good thing investigate.
>> Maybe one thought on that is I almost
feel like um well there's the homminid
intelligence and there's I would say
like the bird intelligence right like
ravens etc are extremely clever but uh
they their brain brain parts are
actually quite distinct and we don't
have that much um
>> existence so maybe that's an slight
event of there's a slight indication of
maybe intelligence springing up a few
times and so in that case you'd maybe
expect it more frequently or something
like that. Yeah, a former guest Gw and
also Carl Sherman have made made a
really interesting point about that
which is their perspective is that the
scalable algorithm which humans have and
primates have
>> arose in birds as well
>> and maybe other times as well. But in
humans found a evolutionary niche which
rewarded marginal increases in
intelligence.
>> Um and also had a scalable brain
algorithm that could achieve those
increases in intelligence.
>> The and so for example if a bird had a
bigger brain it would just like collapse
out of the air. So it's very smart for
the size of its brain but it's like it's
not in a niche which rewards the brain
getting bigger.
>> Um yeah
>> maybe similar with some really smart
>> dolphins etc.
>> Exactly. Yeah. Whereas humans, you know,
like we have hands that like reward
being able to learn how to do tool use.
We can externalize digestion, more
energy to the brain
>> and that um kicks off the flywheel.
>> Oh, yeah. And just stuff to work with. I
mean, I'm guessing it would be harder to
if I was a dolphin.
>> Um I mean, how do you do you can't have
fire for example and stuff like that? I
mean, the probably like the universe of
things you can do in water um like
inside water is probably lower than what
you can do on land um just chemically,
>> right? Yeah, I do I do agree with this
with this viewpoint of these niches and
what's what's being incentivized. I
still find it kind of miraculous that uh
I don't I I would have maybe expected
things to get stuck on like animals with
bigger muscles, you know?
>> Yeah.
>> Like going through intelligence is
actually a really fascinating uh
breaking point. The the way Burn put it
is the reason it was so hard is is a
very tight line between being in a
situation where something is so
important to learn
that it's not just worth distilling the
exact right circuits directly back into
your DNA
>> versus it's not important enough to
learn at all.
>> Yeah.
>> It has to be something which is like
>> you have to to incentivize building the
algorithm to learn in lifetime.
>> Yeah. Exactly. You have to incentivize
some kind of adaptability. You actually
want something that you actually want
environments that are unpredictable. So
evolution can't bake your algorithms
into your weights. A lot of um a lot of
animals are basically pre-baked in this
sense and so humans have to figure it
out at test time when they get born. And
so maybe there was um you actually want
these kinds of uh environments that
actually change really rapidly or
something like that where you can't
foresee um what will work well and so
you actually put all that intelligent
you create intelligence to figure it out
at test time. Uh so Quentyn Pope had
this interesting blog post where he's
saying the Brazilian doesn't expect a
sharp takeoff is um the so humans had
the sharp takeoff where 60,000 years ago
we seem to have had the cognitive
architectures that we have today
>> and 10,000 years ago agricultural
revolution modernity dot dot dot. What
was happening in that 50,000 years?
>> Well, you had to build this sort of like
cultural scaffold where you can
accumulate knowledge over generations.
This is an ability that exists for free
in the way we do AI training where if
you retrain a model it can still I mean
in many cases they're literally
distilled but they can be trained on
each other you know they can be trained
on the premium pre-training corpus um
they don't literally have to start from
scratch so there's a sense in which the
thing which it took humans a long time
to get this cultural loop going just
comes for free with the way we do LLM
training. Um, yes and no because LMs
don't really have the equivalent of
culture and maybe we're giving them way
too much and incentivizing not to create
it or something like that. But I guess
like the notion of culture and of
written record and of like passing down
notes between each other. I don't think
there's an equivalent of that with LM
right now. So LM don't really have
culture right now and it's kind of like
one of the I think uh impediments I
would say. Can
>> can you give me some sense of what LLM
culture might look like? Uh, so in the
simplest case, it would be a giant
scratch pad that the LLM can edit. And
as it's reading stuff or as it's helping
out with work, it's editing the scratch
pad for itself.
>> Why can't an LLM write a book for the
other LM? That would be cool.
>> Yeah.
>> Like why can't other LLMs read this
LLM's book and be inspired by it or
shocked by it or something like that?
There's no equivalence for any of this
stuff.
>> Interesting. When would you expect that
kind of thing to start happening? And
more general question about like multi-
aent systems and a sort of like
independent AI. Yeah, civilization and
culture.
>> I think there's two powerful ideas in
the realm of multi- aent that have both
not been like really claimed or or so
on. The first one I would say is culture
and LLM's basically a growing uh
repertoire of knowledge uh for their own
purposes.
>> Uh the second one looks a lot more like
uh the powerful idea of selfplay. Uh in
my mind it's extremely powerful. So
evolution actually is a lot of um
competition basically driving
intelligence and and evolution. Um and
uh for in AlphaGo more algorithmically
like Alph Go is playing against itself
and that's how it learns to get really
good at Go and there's no equivalent of
selfplaying LMS but I would expect that
to also exist but no one has done it yet
like why can't an LM for example create
a bunch of problems that another LM is
learning to solve and then the the LM is
always trying to like serve more and
more difficult problems stuff like that
you know so like
>> I think there's a bunch of ways to
actually organize it um and I think it's
a realm of research uh but I think I
haven't seen anything that convincing ly
like claims both of those
>> like multi- aent uh improvements. I
still think we're mostly in the realm of
a single individual agent, but I think I
also think that will change and and um
in the realm of culture also I would
bucket also organizations and we haven't
seen anything like that coming in
either.
>> Um so that's why we're still early.
>> And can you identify the key bottleneck
that's uh preventing this kind of
collaboration between LLMs? Maybe like
the way I would put it is
somehow remarkably again some of these
analogies work and they shouldn't but
somehow remarkably they do a lot of the
smaller models or the dumber like the
smaller models somehow remarkably
resemble like a kindergarten student or
then like a elementary school student or
high school student etc. And somehow we
still haven't like graduated enough
where the stuff can take over like it's
still mostly like my cloth code or
codeex they still kind of feel like this
elementary grade student. I know that
they can take PhD quizzes, but they
still cognitively feel like a
kindergarten or an elementary entry
school student. So, I don't think they
can create culture because they're still
kids. Um, you know,
>> like they're savant kids. Um, they have
episodic, they have perfect memory of
all this stuff, etc. And they can, uh,
convincingly create all kinds of slop
that looks really good.
>> But I still think they don't really know
what they're doing and they don't really
have the cognition uh, across all these
little check boxes that we still have to
collect.
>> Yeah. So, you've talked about how you
were at Tesla leading self-driving from
2017 to 2022 and then you firsthand saw
this progress from we went from cool
demos to now thousands of cars out there
actually autonomously doing drives. Why
did that take a decade? Like what was
happening through that time?
>> Yeah. Uh so I would say one thing I will
almost instantly also push back on is
this is not even near done.
>> So in a bunch of ways that I'm going to
get to. I do think that uh self-driving
is very interesting because uh it's
definitely like where I get a lot of my
intuitions because I spent 5 years on
it. Um and it has this entire history
where actually the first demos of
self-driving go all the way to 1980s.
>> You can see a demo from CMU in 1986
there's a truck that's driving itself on
roads. Um but okay fast forward I think
when I was joining Tesla I had um I had
a very early demo of a Whimo and it
basically gave me a perfect drive uh in
200 2014 or something like that. So
perfect way drive a decade ago uh gave
to us around Palo Alto and so on because
I had a friend who worked there. Um and
I thought it was like very close and
then still took a long time and I do
think that some there's for some kinds
of um tasks and jobs and so on uh the
there's a very large demoto product gap
where the demo is very easy but the
product is very hard. Um, and it's
especially the case in cases like
self-driving where the the cost of
failure is too high, right? Many ind
many industries tasks and jobs maybe
don't have that property, but when you
do have that property, that definitely
increases the timelines. I do think that
for example in software engineering, I
do actually think that that property
does exist. I think for a lot of vibe
coding it doesn't but I think if you're
writing actual production grade code I
think that property should exist because
any kind of mistake actually leads to a
security vulnerability or something like
that and millions and hundreds of
millions of people's personal social
security numbers etc get leaked or
something like that and so I do think
that it is a case that in software
people should be careful um kind of like
in self-driving um like in self-driving
if you if it things go wrong you might
get injury in um I guess there's worse
outcomes but I guess in in software I
almost feel like it's almost unbounded
how terrible some things could be.
>> Interesting.
>> So I do think that they share that
property. And then I think basically
what takes the long amount of time and
the way to think about it is that it's a
march of nines and every single nine is
a constant amount of work. So every
single nine is the same amount of work.
So when you get a demo and something
works 90% of the time, that's just uh
that's just uh what the first nine and
then you need the second nine and third
nine, fourth nine, fifth nine. And while
I was at Tesla for was it five years or
so. I think we went through maybe three
nines or two nines. I don't know what it
is, you know, but like multiple nines of
iteration, there's still more nines to
go. And so that's why these things take
take so long. Um, and so it's definitely
formative for me like seeing something
that was a demo. I'm very unimpressed by
demos. Um, so whenever I see demos of
anything, I'm extremely unimpressed by
that. Um, it works better if you can um
if it's a demo that someone cooked up
and is just showing you it's worse. If
you can interact with it, it's a bit
better. But even then, you're not done.
You need actual product. It's going to
face all these challenges in when it
comes in contact with reality and all
these different pockets of behavior that
need patching. And so I think we're
going to see all this stuff play out.
It's a march of nines. Each nine is
constant. Uh demos are encouraging.
Still a huge amount of work to do. Uh I
do think it is a um kind of a critical
safety domain unless you're doing bip
coding, which is all nice and fun and so
on. And uh so that's why I think this
also enforces my timelines from that
perspective. Hm. That's that's very
interesting to hear you say that the
sort of safety guarantees you need from
software are actually not dissimilar to
self-driving because what people will
often say is that self-driving took so
long because the cost of failure is so
high. Like a human makes a mistake on
the average every 400,000 miles or every
seven years. And if you had to release a
coding agent that couldn't make a
mistake for at least seven years, it
would be much harder to deploy. But I
guess your point is that if you made a
catastrophic coding mistake like yeah
>> breaking some important system every
seven years
>> very easy to do
>> and in fact in terms of sort of wall
clock time it much it would be much less
than seven years because you're like
constantly outputting code like that
right so like per tokens or in terms of
tokens it would be seven years but in
terms of wall clock time
>> in some way it's a much harder problem I
mean self-driving is just one of
thousands of things that people do it's
almost like a single vertical I suppose
um whereas when we're talking about
general software engineering it's even
more there's more surface Yeah,
>> there's another uh objection people make
to that analogy,
>> which is that
>> with self-driving, what took a big
fraction of that time was solving the
problem of building basic uh having
basic perception that's robust and
building representations and having a
model that has some common sense so it
can generalize to when I see something
that's slightly out of distribution. If
somebody's waving down the road this
way, you don't need to train for it. the
thing will uh have some understanding of
how to respond to something like that.
>> And these are things we're getting for
free with LLMs or VLMs today. So we
don't have to solve these very basic
representation problems. And so now
deploying AI across different domains
will sort of be like deploying a
self-driving car with current models to
a different city which is hard but not
like a 10 year long task.
>> Yeah. Basically I'm not 100% sure if I
fully agree with that. I don't know that
we're how much we're getting for free
and I still think there's like a lot of
gaps in understanding in what we are
getting. Um I mean we're definitely
getting more generalizable intelligence
in a single entity. Uh whereas uh
self-driving is a very special purpose
task that requires in some sense
building a special purpose task is maybe
even harder in a certain sense because
it doesn't like fall out from a more
general thing that you're doing at scale
if that makes sense. So, um, but I still
think that the analogy doesn't, uh, I
still don't know if it fully resonates
because, um, like the LMS are still
pretty fallible and I still think that
they have a lot of gaps and that it
still needs to be filled in. And I don't
think that we're getting like magical
generalization completely out of the
box, uh, sort of in in a certain sense.
And the other aspect that I wanted to
also actually return to when I was uh,
in the in the beginning was uh,
self-driving cars are nowhere down
still.
>> So even though um, so the deployments
still are pretty minimal, right? Uh so
even Whimo and so on has very few cars
and they're doing that roughly speaking
because they're not economical, right?
Um because they've built something that
that lives in the future. Um and so they
they had to like pull back future but
they had had to make it uneconomical. So
they have all these like um you know
there's all these costs not just
marginal costs for those cars and their
operation and maintenance but also the
capex of the entire thing.
>> Um so making economical is still going
to be a slog I think uh for them. Um,
and then also I think when you look at
these cars and there's no one driving,
um, I also think it's a little bit
deceiving because there are actually
very elaborate operation centers of
people actually kind of like in a loop
with these cars. And I don't have the I
don't know the full extent of it, but I
think um
>> there's more human in the loop that you
might expect and there's people
somewhere out there basically beaming in
from the sky.
>> Uh, and uh, I don't actually know
they're fully in the loop with the
driving. I think some of the times they
are but they're certainly involved and
there are people and in some sense we
haven't actually removed the person
we've like moved them to somewhere where
we can't see them. I still think there
will be some work as you mentioned going
from environment to environment and uh
so I think like there's still challenges
to to make self driving real but I I do
agree that it's definitely cross a
threshold where it kind of feels real
unless it's like retail operated. Um for
example Whimo can't go to all the
different parts of the city. My
suspicion is it's like parts of city
where you don't get good signal
>> anyway. So basically I don't actually
know anything about the stack. I mean
I'm just making up making
>> up. You less self love driving for 5
years at Tesla.
>> Sorry I don't know anything about the
specifics of Whimo. I feel talk about
them.
>> I actually by the way I love Whimo and I
take it all the time. So I don't want to
say like
>> I just think that people again are
sometimes a little bit too naive about
some of the progress and I still think
there's a huge amount of work
>> and I think Tesla took in my mind a lot
more scalable approach and I think the
team is doing extremely well and it's
going to um and I I I'm kind of like on
the record for predicting how this thing
will go which is like way more like
early start because you can package up
so many sensors but I do think Tesla is
taking the more uh scalable strategy and
it's going to look a lot more like that
u so I think this will have to still uh
play out and hasn't but basically Like I
don't want to talk about self driving as
something that took a decade because it
didn't take it didn't take yet
if that makes sense
>> because one it's the the start is at
1980 not 10 years ago and then two the
end is not here yet.
>> Yeah. The end is not not near yet
because uh when we're talking about
self-driving usually in my mind it's
self-driving at scale. Yeah.
>> Um people don't have to get a driver's
license etc. I'm I'm curious to bounce
two other ways in which the analogy
might be different.
>> And the reason I'm especially curious
about this is because I think the
question of how fast AI is deployed, how
valuable it is when it's early on is
like potentially the most important
question in the world right now, right?
Like if you're trying to model what the
Euro 20 or 30 looks like, this is the
question you want to have some
understanding of. So another thing you
might think is one you have this latency
requirement with self-driving where you
have I have no idea what the actual
models are but I assume like tens of
millions of parameters or something
which is not the necessary constraint
for um knowledge work with LLMs or maybe
it might be with the computer use and
stuff but anyways the other big one is
maybe more importantly on this capex
question yes there is additional cost to
serving up an additional copy of a model
But the sort of opex of a session
>> is quite low and you can amortize the
cost of AI into the training run itself
depending on how inference scaling goes
and stuff but it's certainly not as much
as like building a whole new car
>> to serve another instance of a model. So
it just the economics of deploying more
widely
>> are much more favorable.
>> I think that's right. I think if you're
sticking in the realm of bits, bits are
like a million times easier than
anything that touches the physical
world.
>> No.
>> Uh I definitely grant that. Uh bits are
completely changeable, arbitrarily
reshuffable at very rapid speed. Uh so
you would expect a lot more
>> faster uh adaptation also in the
industry and so on.
>> And then uh what was the first one?
>> The latency requirements and it
implications for model size.
>> I think that's roughly right. I mean I
also think that if we are talking about
knowledge work at scale there will be
some u latency requirements practically
speaking because we uh you know we're
going to have to make create a huge
amount of compute instead of that.
>> Um and then I think like the last aspect
that I very briefly want to also talk
about is like all the all the rest of it
the
>> just all the rest of it. So um what does
society think about it? What is the
legal ramific how is it working legally?
How is it working insurance-wise? who's
really like what is the where what are
those layers of it and aspects of it
what happens with what is the equivalent
of people putting a cone on a whimo
>> you know uh there's going to be
equivalent of all that and so I I do
think that I almost feel like
self-driving is a very nice analogy that
you can borrow things from yeah what is
the equivalent of a cone on the car what
is the equivalent of a teleoperating
worker who's like hidden away um and uh
almost like all the aspects of it
>> yeah do you have any opinions on whether
this implies that the current day I
build
which would like 10x the amount of
available computer in the world in a
year or two and maybe like 100 more than
100x it by the end of the decade. If the
use of AI will be lower than some people
naely predict, does that mean that we're
overbuilding compute or do you is that a
separate question?
>> Kind of like what happened with
railroads and all this kind of stuff?
Sorry.
>> Was it railroads? Oh, sorry. It was um
yeah,
>> there there is like historical precedent
or was it with telecommunication
industry, right? Like prepaving the
internet that only came like a decade
later, you know,
>> and creating like a whole bubble in the
telecommunications industry in the late
90s kind of thing. Yeah.
>> Um so I don't know. I mean, I I
understand I'm sounding very pessimistic
here.
>> I'm only doing that I'm actually
optimistic. I think this will work. I
think it's tractable. I'm only sounding
pessimistic because when I go on my
Twitter timeline, I see all this stuff
that makes no sense to me. And um and I
think there's a lot of reasons for why
that exists. And I think a lot of it is
I think honestly just uh fundraising.
It's just incentive structures. A lot of
it may be fundraising. A lot of it is
just attention um you know, converting
attention to money on the internet, you
know, stuff like that. Um, so I think
there's u there's a lot of that going on
and I think I'm only reacting to that.
Um, but I'm still like overall very
bullish on technology. I think we're
going to work through all this stuff and
I think there's been a rapid amount of
progress. Um, I don't actually know that
there's overbuilding. I think that
there's going to be we're going to be
able to gobble up what in my
understanding is being built. Uh,
because I do think that for example
cloud code or open codex and stuff like
that, they didn't even exist a year ago,
right? Is that right? I think it's
roughly right. um this is miraculous
technology that didn't exist. I think um
uh there's going to be a huge amount of
demand as there as we see the demand in
Chaship PT already and so on. So uh
yeah, I don't actually know that there's
overbuilding. Um but I guess I'm just
reacting to like some of the very fast
timelines that people continue to say
incorrectly and I've heard many many
times over the course of my 15 years in
AI where very reputable people keep
getting this wrong all the time.
And I think I want this to be properly
calibrated and I think some of this also
it does have like geopolitical
ramifications and things like that when
uh like some of these questions and I
think I don't want people to make
mistakes on that on that sphere of
things. So um I do want us to be
grounded in reality of what technology
is and isn't. So
>> let's let's talk about education in
Eureka and stuff.
>> One thing you could do is uh start
another AI lab and then try to solve
those problems. Um, yeah. C curious what
you're up to now.
>> Yeah.
>> And then, yeah, why not AI research
itself?
>> Uh, I guess maybe like the way I would
put it is I feel some amount of like
determinism around the things that AI
labs are doing. Um, and I feel like I
could help out there, but I don't know
that I would uh like uniquely um I don't
know that I would like uniquely uh
improve it. But I I think like my
personal big fear is that a lot of this
stuff happens on the side of humanity
and that humanity gets disempowered by
it. And I don't I I kind of like I care
not just about all the Dyson spheres
that we're going to build and that AI is
going to build in a fully autonomous
way. I care about what happens to
humans.
>> Yeah.
>> And I want humans to be well off in this
future. And I feel like that's where I
can a lot more uniquely add value than
uh like an incremental improvement in a
frontier lab. And so, um, I guess I'm
most afraid of something maybe like, um,
depicted in movies like Wall-E or
Idiocracy or something like that where
humanity is sort of on the side of this
stuff. Um, and I want humans to be much
much better in this future. And so I
guess uh to me uh this is kind of like
through education that you can actually
achieve this
>> and and uh so what are you working on
there?
>> Oh yeah. So Eureka is trying to build I
think maybe the easiest way I can
describe it is we're trying to build the
Starfleet Academy.
>> Um I don't know if you watched Star
Trek. I haven't. But yeah.
>> Okay. Starfleet Academy is this like
elite institution for frontier
technology building spaceships and
graduating cadetses to be like you know
the pilots of these spaceships and
whatnot. So I just imagine like an elite
institution for technical knowledge and
um and basically a kind of school that's
um very upto-date and very like premier
institution. A category of questions I
have for you is just explaining how one
teaches technical or scientific content
>> well because you are one of the world
masters at it and then I'm curious both
about how you think about it for content
you've already put out there on YouTube.
>> Yeah.
>> But also to the extent it's any
different how you think about it for
Eureka.
>> Yeah. Yeah. With respect to Eureka, I
think like one thing that is very
fascinating to me about education is
like I do think education will pretty
fundamentally change with AIS on the
side and I think it has to be rewired
and changed um to some extent. I still
think that we're pretty early. I think
there's going to be a lot of people who
are going to try to do the obvious
things which is like oh have an LLM and
uh ask it questions and get you know do
all the basic things that you would do
via prompting right now. I I think it's
helpful but it still feels to me a bit
slop like slop. I I'd like to do it
properly and I think the capability is
not there for what I would want. What
I'd want is uh like an actual uh tutor
experience. Um maybe a prominent example
in my mind is um I was recently learning
Korean. So language learning
>> and I went through a phase where I was
learning Korean by myself on the
internet. I went through a phase where I
was actually part of a small class uh in
Korea. Uh taking a taking a Korean with
a bunch of other people which was really
funny. But we had a teacher and like 10
people or so taking Korean. And then I
switched to a one-on-one tutor. And um I
guess what was fascinating to me is I
think I had a really good tutor. Uh but
um I mean just thinking through like
what this tutor was doing for me and how
incredible that experience was and how
high the bar is for like what I actually
want to build eventually.
>> Um because uh I mean she was extremely
so she instantly from a very short
conversation understood like where I am
as a student, what I know and don't know
and she was able to like probe exactly
like the kinds of questions or things to
understand my world model. M no LLM will
do that for you 100% right now. Not even
close, right?
>> But a tutor will do that if if they're
good.
>> Once she understands um she actually
like really served me all the things
that I needed at my current sliver of
capability. I need to be always
appropriately challenged. I can't be
faced with something too hard or too
trivial. And a tutor is really good at
serving you just the right stuff. And so
basically I felt like I was the only
constraint to learning like my own. I
was the only constraint. I was always
given the perfect information.
>> I'm the only constraint. And I felt good
because I'm the only impediment that
exists. It's not that I can't find
knowledge or that it's not properly
explained or etc. Like it's just my
ability to memorize and so on. And this
is what I want for people. How do you
automate that?
>> So very good question about the current
capability. You don't
>> but I do think that with uh as um and
that's why I think u it's not actually
the right right time to actually build
this kind of an AI tutor. I still think
it's a useful product um and lots of
people will build it but I still feel
like um the bar is so high uh and the
capability is not there. Um uh but I
mean even today I would say chachin is
an extremely um valuable educational
product but I think for me it was so
fascinating to see how high the bar is
and when I was with her I almost felt
like there's no way I can build this.
>> But you are building it right?
>> Anyone who's had a really good tutor is
like how are you going to build this?
Um so I guess I I'm waiting for that
capability. I I do think that in a lot
of ways in the industry, for example, I
did some AI consulting for computer
vision. Yeah. Um
>> a lot of my times the value that I
brought to the company was telling them
not to use AI.
>> It wasn't like I was the AI expert and
they described a problem and I said
don't use AI.
>> This was my value ad. And I feel like
it's in the same in education right now
where I kind of feel like for what I
have in mind, it's not yet the time, but
the time will come. But for now, I'm
building something that looks maybe a
bit more conventional. um that has a
physical and digital component and so
on. But I think there's obvious there's
obvious it's obvious how this should
look like in the future.
>> Do they extend you're willing to say
what is the thing you hope will be
released this year or next year?
>> Well, so I'm building the first course
and I want to have a really really good
course uh state-of-the-art obvious
state-of-the-art destination you go to
learn AI in this case because that's
just what I'm familiar with. So I think
it's a really good first product to get
to be really good. Um and so that's what
I'm building and nano chat which you
briefly mentioned is a capstone project
of uh LLM 101n which is a class that I'm
building.
>> So um that's a really big piece of it
but now I have to build out a lot of the
intermediates and then I have to
actually like hire a small team of you
know TAs and so on and actually like uh
build the entire course. And maybe one
more thing that I would say is like many
times when people think about education
they think about sort of like the more
what I would say is like kind of a
softer component of like diffusing
knowledge or like um but I actually have
something very hard and technical in
mind and so in my mind education is kind
of like the very difficult technical
like uh process of building ramps to
knowledge.
>> So in my mind nano chat is a ramp to
knowledge because it's a very simple
it's like the super simplified full
stack thing. If you give this artifact
to someone and they like look through
it, they're learning a ton of stuff.
>> Yeah.
>> And so, uh, it's giving you a lot of
what I call Eurekas per second. Yeah.
Which is like understanding per second.
That's what I want. Lots of Eurekas per
second. Um and so to me this is a
technical problem of how do we build
these ramps to knowledge and uh so I
almost think of Eureka as almost like a
it's not like maybe that different maybe
through through some of the for frontier
labs or some of the work that's going to
be going on because I want to figure out
how to build these frontier these ramps
very efficiently so that people are
never stuck um and everything is always
not too hard or not too not too trivial
and uh you can you have just the right
material to actually progress.
>> Yeah. So you're imagining the short term
that instead of a tutor being able to
like probe your understanding, if you
have enough self-awareness to be able to
probe yourself
>> there, you're never going to be stuck.
You can like find the right answer
between talking to the TA or talking to
an LLM and looking at the reference
implementation. It sounds like
automation or AI is actually not a
significant like so far it's actually
the the big alpha here is your ability
to explain AI codified in the source
material of the class right that's like
fundamentally what the course is
>> I mean I think you always have to be
calibrated to what the capability what
capability exists in the industry and I
think a lot of people are going to
pursue like oh just ask chasha etc uh
but I I think like right now for example
if you go to chasha and you say oh teach
me AI there's no way it's I mean it's
going to give you some slop right
>> like when I AI is never going to write
nano chat right now but nano chat is a
really useful I think intermediate point
>> so I still I'm collaborating with AI to
create all this material so AI is still
fundamentally very helpful
>> um earlier on I built a CS231N at
Stanford which was one of the earlier
actually sorry I think it was the first
deep learning class at Stanford which
became very popular
>> um and the difference in building out
231N and L101N now is quite stark
uh because I'm I feel really empowered
by the LMS as they exist right now but
I'm very much in the loop
>> so they're helping me build all the
materials I go much faster u they're
doing a lot of the boring stuff etc uh
so I feel like I'm developing the course
much faster and there's LLM infused in
it but it's not yet at a place where I
can creatively create the content I'm
still there to do that
>> so like I think the trickiness is always
calibrating yourself to what exists
>> and so when you imagine what is
available through Eureka in a couple of
years it seems like the big bottleneck
is going to
finding corpse in field after field who
can
>> convert their understanding into these
ramps right
>> so I think it would change over time so
I think right now it would be uh hiring
faculty
>> Mhm.
>> to help work handin-hand with AI and a
team of people probably uh to build
state-of-the-art courses.
>> Yeah.
>> And then I think over time it can maybe
some of the TAs can actually become AIs
because some of the TAS like okay you
just take all the course materials
>> and then I think you could serve a very
good like automated TA. for the student
when they have more basic questions or
something like that, right? But I think
you'll need faculty for the overall
architecture of a course and making sure
that it fits. And so I kind of see a
progression of how this will evolve and
maybe at some future point, you know,
I'm not even that useful in AI is doing
most of the design much better than I
could.
>> But I still think that that's going to
take some time to play out. But are you
imagining that like uh people who have
expertise in other fields are then
contributing courses or do you feel like
it's actually quite essential to the
vision that you given your understanding
of how you want to teach are the one
designing the content
>> like I don't know Salon is like
narrating all the videos on Khan Academy
are you imagining something like that or
>> no I will hire faculty I think because
there are domains in which I'm not an
expert um and I think uh that's the only
way to offer the state-of-the-art
experience for the student ultimately.
So um
>> yeah I do expect that I would hire
faculty but I will probably stick around
in AI for some time but in I do have
something I think more conventional in
mind for the current capability I think
than what people would probably
anticipate. Um, and when I'm building
Starfleet Academy, I do probably imagine
a physical uh institution and maybe a
tier below that, a digital offering that
um is not the same not the
state-of-the-art experience you would
get when someone comes in physically
full-time and we work through material
from start to end and make sure you
understand it. Uh that's the physical
offering.
>> Um the digital offering is yeah, a bunch
of stuff on the internet and maybe some
LLM assistant and it's a bit more
gimmicky in a tier below, but uh at
least it's accessible to like eight
billion people. So
>> yeah, I think you're basically inventing
college from first principles for the
tools that are available today and then
just like for just like selecting for
people who have the motivation and the
interest of actually
>> really engaging with material.
>> Yeah. And I think there's going to have
to be a lot of not just education but
also re-education. And I would love to
uh help out uh there uh because I think
the jobs will probably change quite a
bit. Um and so for example today a lot
of people are trying to upskill in AI
specifically. So I think it's a really
good course to teach in this in this
respect. Um and yeah I think the
motivation wise uh before AGI uh
motivation is very simple to solve
because uh people want to make money and
this is how you make money in the
industry today.
>> I think post AGI it's a lot more
interesting um possibly because yeah if
everything is automated and there's
nothing to do for anyone why would
anyone go to a school etc. Um so I think
uh I guess like I often say that
pre-aggi education is useful, post AGI
education is fun
>> and uh in a similar way as people for
example uh people go to gym today.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh but we don't need their physical
strength to manipulate uh heavy objects
because we have machines that do that.
>> They still go to gym. Why do they go to
gym? Well, because it's fun. It's
healthy. It's uh and it's and you look
hot when you have a six-pack. I don't
know. I guess like um so it's I guess
what I'm saying is um it's attractive
for people to do that in a certain like
very deep psychological evolutionary
sense for humanity.
>> And so I kind of uh think that education
will kind of play out in the same way
like you'll go to school like you go to
gym um and you'll and I think that right
now I think not that many people learn
uh because learning is hard. You bounce
from material because and some people
overcome that barrier but for most
people it's hard. But I do think that we
should it's a technical problem to
solve. It's a technical problem to do
what my uh tutor did for me when I was
learning Korean.
>> I think it's tractable and buildable and
someone should build it and I think it's
going to make learning anything like
trivial and desirable and people will do
it for fun because it's trivial.
>> If I had a tutor like that for any
arbitrary piece of like knowledge, I
think it's going to be so much easier to
to learn anything and people will do it
and they'll do it for the same reasons
they go to gym.
>> I mean that sounds different from
using this. So post Asia you're using
this to um basically as entertainment or
as like a self- betterment but it
sounded like you had a vision also that
this education is relevant to keeping
humanity in control of AI.
>> And they sound different and I'm curious
is it like it's entertaining for some
people but then empowerment for some
others. How do you think about that?
>> I think this um so I do definitely feel
like people will be um I do think like
eventually it's a bit of a losing game
if that makes sense. I do think that it
is in long term long term which I think
is longer than I think maybe most people
in the industry it's a losing game. I I
do think that people can go so far and
that we barely scratched the surface of
much a person can can go and that's just
because people are bouncing off of
material that's too easy or too hard and
they and and I I I actually kind of feel
that people will be able to go much
further like anyone speaks five
languages because why not because it's
so trivial.
>> Um anyone um knows you know all the
basic curriculum of undergrad etc. Now,
now that I'm understanding the vision,
that that's very interesting. Like, I
think it actually has a perfect analog
in gym culture. I don't think a 100
years ago anybody would be like ripped
like nobody would have, you know, be
able to like just spontaneously bench
two plays or three plays or something.
It's actually very common now.
>> And you're because this idea of
systematically training and lifting
weights in the gym or systematically
training to be able to run a marathon,
which is capability spontaneously you
would not have or most humans would not
have. And you're imagining similar
things for
learning across very many different
domains, much more intensely, deeply,
faster.
>> Yeah, exactly. And I kind of feel like I
am betting a little bit implicitly on
some of the timelessness of human
nature.
>> Yeah.
>> And I think um
>> I think it will be desirable to be to to
do all these things. Um
>> and I think people will look up to it
and as they have for for millennia
because uh and I think this will
continue to be true. And actually also
maybe there's some evidence of that
historically because if you look at for
example aristocrats or you look at maybe
ancient Greece or something like that
whenever you had little pocket
environments that were post AGI in a
certain sense I do feel like people have
spent a lot of their time uh flourishing
in a certain way uh either physically or
or cognitively and so I think um I I
feel okay about the prospects of that
>> and I think if this is false and I'm
wrong and we end up in like
>> you know um Wall-E or idiocracy future
then I think it's very I don't even care
if there's like Dyson spheres this is a
terrible outcome.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah.
>> Like I actually really do care about
humanity. Like everyone has to just be
superhuman in a certain sense.
>> I I I guess it's still a world in which
that is not enabling us to
it's it's like the culture world, right?
Like you're not fundamentally going to
be able to like transform the trajectory
of
>> Yeah.
>> uh technology or
>> influence decisions by your own labor or
cognition alone. Maybe you can influence
decisions because the AI is like for
your approval, but you're not like it's
not because I've like I can in because
I've invented something or I've like
come up with a new design, I'm like
really influencing the future.
>> Um yeah, maybe. I don't actually think
that uh I I think there will be
transitional period where we are going
to be able to be in the loop and you
know advance things if we actually
understand a lot of stuff.
>> Um I do think that long term that
probably goes away, right? But um maybe
it's going to even become a sport. But
right now you have powerlifters who go
extreme on this direction. So what is
powerlifting in a cognitive era?
>> Um maybe it's people who are really
trying to make Olympics out of knowing
stuff.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh like and and if you have a perfect AI
tutor, um maybe you can get extremely
far. Yeah.
>> I almost feel like we're just barely the
the geniuses of today are barely
scratching the surface of what a human
mind can do. I think
>> Yeah. I I I love this vision. I also um
it's like I feel like the person you
have like most product market fit with
is like me because like my job involves
having to
>> learn different subjects every week and
I I am I am like very excited if you can
>> I'm similar for that matter. I mean I
you know a lot of people for example uh
hate school and want to get out of it. I
was I was actually I really liked
school. I loved learning things etc. I
wanted to stay in school. I stayed all
the way until PhD and then they wouldn't
let me stay longer so I went to the
industry. But I mean I basically it's
roughly speaking I love uh I love
learning uh even for the sake of
learning but I also um love learning
because it's a form of empowerment and
being useful and productive. I I think
you also made a point that uh was subtle
so just to spell it out. I think what's
happened so far with online courses is
that why haven't they already enabled us
to
enable every single human to know
everything
>> and I think they're just so motivation
laden because there's not obvious
on-ramps and it's like so easy to get
stuck. Um, and if you had
instead this re this thing basically
like a really good human tutor, it it
would just be such an unluck from a
motivation perspective.
>> I think so because it feels bad to
bounce from material. Feels bad. You get
negative reward from
>> uh sinking amount of time in something
and this doesn't pan out or like being
completely bored because what you're
getting is too easy or too hard. So I
think uh yeah I think it feel when you
actually do it properly learning feels
good.
>> Yeah. And I think it's a technical
problem to get there. And I think um for
a while it's going to be AI plus human
collab. And at some point maybe it's
just AI. I don't know.
>> Can I ask some questions about teaching?
Well,
>> if you had to like sort of like give
advice to another educator in another
field that you're curious about
>> to make the kinds of YouTube tutorials
you've made. Um
>> maybe it may be especially interesting
to talk about domains where you can't
just like you can't test somebody's
technical understanding by having them
code something up or something. what
advice would you give them?
>> Uh, so I think that's a pretty broad
topic. I do feel like there's basically
I almost feel like there are 10 20 tips
and tricks that I kind of
semi-consciously probably do, but um
I guess like on a high level, I always
try to I think a lot of this comes from
my physics background. I really really
did enjoy my physics background. I have
a whole rant on I think how everyone
should learn physics uh in the in early
school education because I think early
school education is not about
cremulating knowledge or memory for
tasks later in the industry. It's about
booting up a brain and I think physics
uniquely boots up the brain the best. Uh
because some of the things that they get
you to do in your brain during physics
is is extremely valuable later. the idea
of building models and abstractions and
understanding that there are there's a
first order um approximation that
describes most of the system but then
there's a second order, third order,
fourth order terms that may or may not
be present. And the idea that you're
observing like a very noisy system, but
actually there's like these fundamental
frequencies that you can abstract away.
Like when a physicist walks into the
class and they say, "Oh, assume there's
a spherical cow and dot dot dot." And
everyone laughs at that, but actually
this is brilliant. It's brilliant
thinking that's very generalizable
across the industry because
>> yeah cow is can be approximated as a
sphere I guess in a bunch of ways. Um
there's a really good book for example
scale uh it's basically from a physicist
talking about biology and maybe this is
also a book I would recommend reading
but you can actually get a lot of really
interesting approximations and chart
scaling laws of animals and you can look
at their heartbeats and things like that
and they actually line up and with the
size of the animal and things like that.
You can talk about an animal as a volume
and you can actually drive a lot of um
you can talk about the heat dissipation
uh of that because your your heat
dissipation grows as the surface area
which is growing a square but your heat
creation or generation um is growing as
a cube.
>> And so I just feel like physicists have
all the right cognitive tools to
approach problem solving in the world.
So I think because of that training I
always try to find the first order terms
or the second order terms of everything.
When I'm observing a system or or a
thing, I have a tangle of a web of ideas
or knowledge in my world in my mind and
I'm trying to find what is the what is
the thing that actually matters. What is
the first order component? How can I
simplify it? How can I have a simple
thing that actually shows that thing,
right? Show shows it in action and then
I can tack on the other terms.
>> Yeah,
>> maybe maybe an example from my from one
of my repos that I think illustrates it
well is called microrad. I don't know if
you're familiar with this, but
>> so microrad is 100 lines of code that
shows back propagation. It can uh you
can create neural networks out of simple
operations like plus and times etc Lego
blocks of neural networks and you build
up a computational graph and you do a
forward pass and a backward pass to get
the gradients. Um now this is at the
heart of all neural network learning. So
microrad is a 100 lines of
pre-interpretable python code and it can
do forward and backward arbitrary neural
networks but not efficiently. So
microrad these hundred lines of python
are everything you need to understand
how neural networks train. Everything
else is just efficiency.
>> Yeah.
>> Everything else is efficiency. And
there's a huge amount of work to do
efficiency. You know, you need your
tensors. You lay them out and you stride
them. You make sure your kernels are
orchestrating memory movement correctly,
etc. It's all just efficiency roughly
speaking. But the core intellectual sort
of piece of neural network training is
microat. It's 100 lines. You can easily
understand it. You're chaining. It's a
recursive application of chain rule to
derive the gradient which allows you to
optimize any arbitrary differential
function. So it's a I love finding these
like you know the smaller the terms and
serving them in a very on a platter and
discovering them and I feel like
education is like the most
intellectually interesting thing because
>> you have a tangle of understanding and
you're trying to lay it out in a way
that creates a ramp where everything
only depends on the thing before it and
I find that this like you know
untangling of knowledge is just so
intellectually interesting as a as a
cognitive task.
>> Yeah. And so I love doing it personally,
but I just find have fascination with
trying to lay things out in a certain
way. And maybe that that helps me.
>> It also just makes a learning experience
so much more motivated. You your um
tutorial on the transformer begins with
biogram. It's literally like a lookup
table from
>> here's the word right now
>> or here's the previous word, here's the
next word. And it's literally just a
lookup table.
>> Yeah. That's the essence of it. Yeah. I
mean such a brilliant way like okay
start with a lookup table and then go to
a transformer and then each piece is
motivated why would you add that why
would you add the next thing you
couldn't memorize a sort of attention
formula but it's like having an
understanding of why this is every
single piece is relevant what problem it
solves
>> yeah yeah you're presenting the pain
before you present a solution and how
clever is that and you want to take the
student through that progression so um
there's a lot of like other small things
like that that I think make it make it
nice and engaging interesting and and
you know always prompting the student
there's there's a lot of small things
like that that I think are, you know,
important and a lot of good educators
will do. Uh like how would you solve
this? Like I'm not going to present a
solution before you're going to guess.
>> That would be wasteful. That would be
that's that's a little bit of a
>> I don't want to swear, but like it's a
it's a it's a dick move towards you to
present you with the solution before I
give you a shot to try to um
>> Right.
>> Uh to come up with it yourself.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And because because if you
try to come with yourself, you you I
guess you get a better understanding of
like what is the action space.
>> Yeah. And then what is the sort of like
objective then like why does only this
action fulfill that objective right?
>> Yeah. Well, you have a chance to like
try yourself and you you have an
appreciation when I give you the
solution and uh it maximizes the amount
of knowledge per new fact added.
>> That's right. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Why do you think by default people who
are genuine experts in their field are
often bad at explaining it to somebody
ramping up?
>> Well, it's the curse of knowledge and
expertise. Yeah,
>> this is a real phenomenon and I actually
suffered from it myself as much as I try
to not not suffer from it. But
>> you take certain things for granted and
you can't put yourself in the shoes of
new of people who are just starting out
and uh this is pervasive and happens to
me as well.
>> One thing that I actually think is
extremely helpful as an example someone
was trying to show me a paper in biology
recently
>> and I just had instantly so many
terrible questions. Um,
>> so what I did was I used chacht to ask
the questions with the with the paper in
the context window and then uh it worked
through some of the simple things and
then I actually shared the thread to the
person who shared it uh who actually
like wrote that paper or like worked on
that work and I almost feel like it was
like um like if they can see the dumb
questions I had it might help them
explain it better in the future or
something like that because um so for
example for my material I would love if
people shared their dumb conversations
with Chachi PT about the stuff that I've
created because it really helps me put
myself again in the shoes of someone
who's starting out.
>> Another trick like that that I just
works astoundingly well.
Um, if somebody writes a paper or a blog
post or an announcement, it is in 100%
of cases true that just the narration or
the transcription of how they would
explain it to you over lunch
>> is way more uh not only understandable,
>> but actually also more accurate and
scientific in the sense that people have
a bias to explain things in the most
abstract act jargon filled way possible
and to clear their throat for four
paragraphs before they explain the
central idea.
>> But there's something about
communicating one-on-one with a person
which compels you to just say the thing.
>> Just say the thing.
>> Yeah. Actually, I saw that tweet. I
thought it was really good. I shared it
with a bunch of people actually. I think
it was really good. And I noticed this
many many times. Um maybe the most
prominent example is I remember uh back
in my PhD days doing research etc. Uh
you read someone's paper, right? and you
work you to understand what it's doing
etc. And then you catch them, you're
having beers at the conference later and
you ask them so like this paper like so
what were you doing like what is the
paper about and they will just tell you
these like three sentences that like
perfectly capture the essence of that
paper and totally give you the idea and
you didn't have to read the paper yet.
>> Yeah. And like it's only at when you're
sitting at the table with a beer or
something like that and like oh yeah the
paper is just oh you take this idea you
take that idea and you try this
experiment and uh and you try out this
thing and they have a way of just
putting it conversationally
>> right
>> and just like perfectly like why isn't
that the actual
>> exactly
>> um this is coming from the perspective
of how somebody who's trying to explain
an idea should formulate it better. What
is your advice as a student to other
students where if you don't have a
carpathy who is doing the exposition of
an idea if you're reading a paper for
somebody or reading a book,
>> what strategies do you employ
>> to learn material you're interested in
in fields you're not an expert in?
>> Um I don't actually know that I have um
like unique tips and tricks to be
honest. Um basically it's a it's it's
kind of a painful process. Um but you
know like reddraft one. Um I think like
one thing that has always helped me
quite a bit is um
I had a small tweet about this actually.
So like learning things on demand is is
pretty nice. Learning depthwise. I do
feel like you need a bit of alternation
of learning depth wise. On demand you're
trying to achieve a certain project that
you're going to get a reward from.
>> And learning breathwise which is just oh
let's do whatever one and here's all the
things you might need. Which is a lot of
school does a lot of breath wise
learning like oh trust me you'll need
this later. you know that kind of a
stuff
>> like okay I trust you I'll learn it
because I guess I need it.
>> But I love the kind of learning where
you'll actually get a reward out of
doing something and you're learning on
demand.
>> The other thing that I've found is
extremely helpful is um maybe this is an
aspect where education is a bit more
selfless because uh explaining things to
people is a beautiful way to learn
something more deeply. Uh this uh
happens to me all the time. I think it
probably happens to other people too
because
>> I realize if I don't really understand
something I can't explain it, you know,
and and um I'm trying and I'm like
actually actually I don't understand
this and it's so annoying to come to
terms with that and then you can go back
and make sure you understood it and so
it fills these gaps of your
understanding. It forces you to come to
terms with them and uh to reconcile
them. I love to reexlain and things like
that and I think people should be doing
that more as well. I think that forces
you to manipulate the knowledge and make
sure that you you know what you're
talking about when you're explaining it.
Oh yeah, I think that's an excellent
note to close on.
>> Yeah,
>> Andre, that was great.
>> Yeah, thank you. Thanks. Take your time.
>> Hey everybody, I hope you enjoyed that
episode. If you did, the most helpful
thing you can do is just share it with
other people who you think might enjoy
it. It's also helpful if you leave a
rating or a comment on whatever platform
you're listening on. If you're
interested in sponsoring the podcast,
you can reach out at
dwarcash.com/advertise.
Otherwise, I'll see you on the next one.